Robert Blake, an actor whose career portraying gritty characters such as TV detective Tony Baretta was eclipsed by his trial and acquittal in the killing of his wife in 2001, died Thursday at his home in Los Angeles. He was 89. The cause was long-term heart disease, said a niece, Noreen Austin. Blake began performing at two, when his father would take him and his brother and sister to New Jersey parks to dance for money. By age five, he was a regular in the Our Gang film comedies. He went on to act in scores of films and on hundreds of TV shows, all the while making regular visits to late-night talkshows, where he delighted in spouting flagrantly unorthodox views and savagely mocking his own career. He also earned a reputation as a Hollywood enfant terrible. He insulted producers, punched a director, fought with fellow actors, abused alcohol and drugs, and sometimes went for years without work. He nonetheless became a television star in the late 1970s as Baretta, a detective who lived in a rundown hotel, had a pet cockatoo named Fred and used disguises – waiter, wino, janitor, barber – to chase bad guys. His catchphrase, “You can take dat to da bank,” became well known. One of Blake’s most acclaimed roles was as mass murderer Perry Smith in In Cold Blood, the 1967 film adaptation of Truman Capote’s true-crime book. In an interview with Playboy in 1977, Blake explained that he had sought the part to explore a question that nagged him. “Everybody knows what a murderer is a millionth of a second after he pulls the trigger,” he said. “But what is he a millionth of a second before he pulls the trigger?” A jury – and a transfixed American public – pondered whether he could answer that question during his trial, from late 2004 to March 2005, in the shooting death of his wife, Bonny Lee Bakley. The details of the case could have come from a pulp novel. Witnesses portrayed Blake as trolling jazz clubs for women, then wooing them in the back seat of his truck. Bakley was alleged to be a petty criminal who sold nude pictures of herself to lonely men through the mail. She had nine former husbands and a dozen aliases and was on probation for fraud, according to court testimony. By 1999, she was in Los Angeles. She met Blake at a nightclub and, as both acknowledged, had sex with him in his car that night. At the time, she was having a sexual relationship with Christian Brando, the eldest son of Marlon Brando. When she gave birth to a daughter, tests revealed that the father was Blake and not Christian Brando, whom she had first identified. Blake, whose marriage to actor Sondra Kerr ended in divorce in 1983 after 22 years, said he had agreed to marry Bakley for the good of their daughter, Rose. According to trial testimony, the marriage was strained, and Bakley lived in a separate house on his property. Witnesses said he referred to his wife as a “pig” and spoke of wanting to “snuff” her. On May 4th, 2001, Bakley (44) was found dead from a gunshot to her head in her husband’s Dodge Stealth, parked outside an Italian restaurant in the Studio City section of Los Angeles, where the couple had just dined. Blake said he was not there when she was shot; he said he had gone back to the restaurant to retrieve a gun he had left in a booth. That gun, it was determined, was not the murder weapon; one found in a nearby dumpster was. By April 2002, police had nonetheless gathered enough evidence to charge Blake with “murder with special circumstances”, a capital offence. He was also charged with soliciting movie stuntmen to do the killing for him. After he pleaded not guilty to all charges, the Los Angeles District Attorney’s Office announced that it would not seek the death penalty. Blake was initially denied bail and spent 11 months in jail, until March 2003, when he was granted bail, set at $1.5 million, which he posted, allowing him to remain free for almost two years while he awaited trial. On March 16th, 2005, after a three-month trial in which the stuntmen testified to having been solicited by Blake to kill Bakley, the jury decided that the prosecutors had not proved Blake’s guilt. In interviews afterward, jurors said the stuntmen had not been credible because they had admitted to being drug addicts. Blake said three restaurant workers had seen him return to get his gun, but he did not produce them. Bakley’s family later sued Blake in civil court for wrongfully causing her death. They won a $30 million judgment, which, after Blake appealed, was cut in half on the grounds that Bakley had been earning her living by illegal means. Blake filed for bankruptcy in 2006. Michael James Vijencio Gubitosi was born September 18th, 1933, in Nutley, New Jersey. His childhood, as he later described it, was a Dickensian one whose horrors began before he was born. He told CNN in 2012 that his mother had twice tried to abort him with a coat hanger. In a series of interviews in 1992 and 1993, he said his father, who worked for a can manufacturer, had been an alcoholic who forced him to eat from the floor, locked him in closets and sexually abused him. When Blake was two, his father enlisted him and his two older preschool siblings to dance for money in parks as “the Three Little Hillbillies” while the father played a guitar. “It was either doing that or stealing milk bottles off other people’s porches,” Blake said in a 1959 interview with the Los Angeles Times. Inspired by the success of child stars like Shirley Temple, his father in 1938 took his family to Hollywood. Blake was hired as an extra for the Our Gang shorts, later shown on television as The Little Rascals. When another child actor flubbed a line, Blake told the director, “I can do that.” He could, and he was eventually cast as a lead character, Mickey. He was billed as Mickey Gubitosi in most of the Our Gang shorts, and as Bobby Blake in the last few. He acquired the stage name Robert Blake in 1956. After the Our Gang series ended in 1944, he appeared in more than 70 films over the next decade, establishing himself as a tough, fast-talking young character actor with a mischievous grin. In The Treasure of the Sierra Madre, starring Humphrey Bogart, he was the Mexican boy who sold Bogart the lucky lottery ticket that set the plot in motion. Blake returned to television in January 1975 to take the title role in the ABC detective series Baretta, even though he made it clear in interviews that he considered himself above series television. He proceeded to make many suggestions to shape the renamed show to his liking. “I could have my name all over Baretta, but I’ve never taken credit for writing or directing any of the shows,” he told Playboy. Blake won a 1975 Emmy and a 1976 Golden Globe for his performance, and Baretta was briefly a top 10 hit, but it was cancelled in 1978. Speaking of Blake in an interview with People magazine in 2002, Stephen J. Cannell, the creator of Baretta, said: “Complex doesn’t even begin to capture his personality. If you were in business with him, you just had to strap in really tight, because you were going to get lurched around a lot.” Along with In Cold Blood, his other notable films included Tell Them Willie Boy is Here (1969) and the lead in cult classic Electra Glide in Blue (1973). His last acting job was in Lost Highway (1997), a psychological thriller directed by David Lynch. In addition to his niece, Blake is survived by two children from his first marriage, Noah and Delinah Blake, and Rose Blake, his daughter with Bakley. After his trial, Blake told CNN, he grew a beard, lived on Twinkies and liked to wander into pool halls for a game of nine ball. “I was born lonely, I live lonely and I’ll die lonely,” he said. – This article originally appeared in The New York Times 2023 The New York Times Company