Nine new names feature on this year’s 57-strong Murphia List, the annual compilation of top Irish figures in London’s food-and-drink scene. Olivia McGowan, the new assistant general manager of the Mayfair restaurant Humo, is the sole woman to join the line-up in 2023. Born in Inniscrone, in Co Sligo – where, she says, she and her siblings were roped into helping out at golf-club dos at weekends – she worked at Cooke’s and Avoca in Dublin before moving to London in 2009. She then worked her way up from waiting tables to becoming restaurant manager at Clipstone, maitre d’ at Scott’s and restaurant director of Scully St James. She is joined on the Murphia List by Michael Lynch, head butler at Claridge’s. The Limerick man, who is from Rathcannon, outside the village of Athlacca, has become a familiar face from two BBC documentary series about the five-star hotel, including this year’s Mayfair Hotel Megabuild. Another new entry is Adam Nevin, the new head chef at the Grill at the Dorchester. From Kildare, he trained at Ballymaloe Cookery School, in Co Cork, working at the Shelbourne and Westbury hotels in Dublin before moving to Britain, where he did a stint at the Hand and Flowers, Tom Kerridge’s two-Michelin-star pub in Marlow, outside London, before joining the Dorchester Grill as a sous chef. This year’s Murphia List, which is drawn up by the London food and restaurant website Hot Dinners and sponsored by Bord Bia, also includes Conor Gadd, chef-patron of Trullo, who as a 16-year-old in Belfast worked under Paul Rankin at the chef’s Michelin-starred former restaurant Roscoff. He also trained at Ballymaloe before moving to London. Fionnan Flood, from Greystones, in Co Wicklow, joins the list as head chef at the Chelsea Pig gastropub. Before that he worked for Gordon Ramsay at the Maze Grill and for Richard Corrigan at Lindsay House before leading kitchens at the Arts Club and Riding House Cafe. Diarmuid Goodwin, head chef at Sager + Wilde in Bethnal Green, began his career working at Nick’s Warehouse in Belfast as a teenager. He then spent seven years working for Angela Hartnett, whose restaurants include the Michelin-starred Murano, before moving to work first with Bruno Loubet and then at Trullo. They’re joined by fellow new entries Colin Maher, group bar manager at JKS; the restaurant designer Shayne Brady, cofounder of and director of hospitality at BradyWilliams; and Andrew Fowler, acquisitions director at Edyn and cofounder of the aparthotel company Locke and the hotel company Birch. The 48 existing names on the Murphia List include the Co Meath-born restaurateur and chef Richard Corrigan – who opened the quickly acclaimed Park Cafe in Dublin last year but then had to deal with a wave of staff departures – along with his son Richie Corrigan, operations director of the Corrigan Collection, and daughter, Jessica Corrigan, of Crab Communications. Anna Haugh, the Tallaght chef who combines TV presenting – Saturday Kitchen, Ready, Steady, Cook and, now, Masterchef: The Professionals – with running her Chelsea restaurant, Myrtle, is also among this year’s returning names. Catherine Hanly, who founded Hot Dinners in 2009 with her brother Gavin, says: “Every year we love hearing about the creative contributions being made by Irish people to London hospitality. Whether they’re opening new restaurants, running fabulous pubs or serving up amazing food, the London food and drink scene wouldn’t be the same without them.” Donal Denvir of Bord Bia calls the list “a true celebration of the best of London’s Irish food and drink scene, shining a light on the wealth of talent and creativity Ireland brings to the city”. The year’s Murphia List, the ninth, will be celebrated at a party showcasing Irish produce at the Bloomsbury Hotel in London tonight.