A very early abstract work by renowned artist Sean Scully will lead the forthcoming spring home interiors sale at Aidan Foley’s rooms in Sixmilebridge on March 13th and 14th. Curated by Niall Mullen, the two-day sale of Irish art, antiques, rugs, jewellery and ephemera has almost 2,000 lots. The painting forms part of the collection of the late dealer Stephen Stock who died in February 2022. Based between Dublin and Rosslare, though he never had a shop, he was described as the “ultimate wholesaler” by Mullen. “Stephen was not interested in the ordinary, he always arrived with a quirky collection; he was a generous dealer who always believed in leaving a profit for the buyer,” he says. Auctioneer Foley describes Stock’s collection as comprising of “things he refused to part with or stuff that never sold, with lots of things you’d never see in east Clare”. Stock spent his early summers on Strangford Lough and, aged 18, he hopped (and slept, though used a local YMCA for morning ablutions) in his orange VW Beetle before managing to get a position at Christie’s in South Kensington. He then moved to more affluent surroundings before establishing an avant-garde fashion house, Fatal Attraction in Belfast. Before his death, the “wonderful aesthete and big personality” helped with the interiors of the Queens Bar in Dalkey. Listed with an estimate of €2,000-€4,000, though given Scully’s popularity as one of the world’s most famous abstract painters and the most successful living Irish artist, the painting could well achieve multiples of this. It is dated 1972 verso, which corresponds to the artist’s time studying art at Newcastle University. With a body of work stretching over half a century, he has won the Guggenheim Fellowship and has been twice nominated for the Turner Prize. A retrospective of the artist closes on Sunday at Zagreb’s Museum of Contemporary Art, while his 2000 show, Follow the Heart: The Art of Sean Scully, was the first major exhibit by a western artist in China. The highest price paid for the artist at auction was in 2022, when Song achieved more than $2 million at a Sotheby’s sale in New York. Also taking place on March 14th is an online picture sale at Adam’s of St Stephen’s Green, including works from the studio of Fergus O’Ryan, whose near-70 lots out of 180 in total will go to benefit Our Lady’s Hospice in Harold’s Cross. The late Limerick-born artist won the President Hyde Gold Medal Award at the Oireachtas exhibition in 1956, and became a full member of the Royal Hibernian Academy (RHA) in 1960. There could be bargains to be had in the sale, which also features contemporary works, as many are without reserve. The following day, March 15th, Laois auctioneer Sean Eacrett will hold the first online sale of the contents of three luxury Irish hotels. Included are a five-star hotel in Dublin with 360 lots, including chrome reading lamps with USB portals (€40-€60) and Eames-style chairs (€60-€100). As there are multiples of items, buyers will be offered the opportunity to purchase in bulk. A subsequent sale on March 28th will see the contents of Lough Erne Resort go to auction – the first of three sales this year – as the hotel is undergoing a multimillion-euro facelift. Guests here have included Barack Obama, David Cameron and Vladimir Putin. Tass news agency in Russia reported its leader swam the chilly lake of Lough Erne because “President Obama had reserved the gym” in the hotel, therefore “pushing his Russian counterpart into the lake”, during the G8 summit in 2013. The Lough Erne collection includes chairs, mahogany veneer desks and cabinets. “Such a hoard might suit individual taste but, due to the excellent condition, they would be a great purchase for a small to medium hotel looking to refurbish,” says Eacrett. Wing-back chairs are listed at €80-€120 a pop; luggage racks (€30); 100 mahogany veneer bedside lockers (€40-€60); and full-length double-lined curtains (2.5m) are also available. Later in April, the auctioneer will sell the contents of the Heritage Golf Resort in Killenard, Co Laois, which is also undergoing refurbishment. The National Antiques, Art and Vintage Fair, Ireland’s biggest antiques fair, according to organiser Robin O’Donnell, will take place next weekend, March 18th and 19th, at its new venue, Limerick Racecourse in Patrickswell. “It’s enormous and just keeps growing. I think the reason for this is not just the fantastic venue but also because of the scarcity of physical shops,” says O’Donnell. Highlights from dealers include a Cork gold militia medal from 1798, “as rare and scare as hens teeth”, through JW Weldon, who also has a set of four George III Irish silver candlesticks from 1770, and a really exceptional pair of Irish Regency mahogany elbow chairs from O’Donnell himself. irishcountryhome.com; adams.ie; seaneacrettauctions.ie