Georgian street demonstrations have dealt a decisive blow against plans to pass a foreign agents Bill along Russian lines in parliament, which would have demonised those supporting closer links with the European Union. The Bill has been voted down after this huge show of popular disapproval and the ruling Georgian Dream party is backing away from the faction which introduced it. The events reveal how vulnerable neighbouring small states like Georgia and Moldova are to Russian pressure arising from its intensifying war against Ukraine. Georgia has been in a deep engagement and dialogue with Brussels on its aspiration to join the EU. Its leadership was disappointed not to have been given candidate status last year along with Ukraine and Moldova because of delayed political and judicial reforms and socio-economic ill-preparedness. The objective of EU membership is written into the constitution, enjoys 81 per cent polling approval and is the subject of large-scale aid and reform programmes. Despite this, the country is hamstrung by bitter polarisation between elite-dominated political parties in which most voters lack confidence. There are few opportunities for civil society to influence the highly centralised political system. Election winners take all, control state and judicial institutions and pursue opponents. Oligarchic control of the economy reinforces the pattern, as seen in shadowy manoeuvres surrounding the foreign agents Bill linked to Salome Zourabichvili, the main funder of the Georgian Dream party, who has links to Putin’s regime. The governing party and system have been shaken by this popular mobilisation against the now-defeated Bill, recalling similar events in Ukraine, Belarus and Moldova against pro-Russian moves. Elections next year are likely to reflect this. But longer-term shifts bringing Georgia closer to EU candidate membership require moves to push forward with political and social reforms aimed at more effective democratic participation. That should be a priority after this important victory.