So much of beauty writing and content relies upon what people in the industry refer to as “newness” – the constant influx of new products and trends. It’s a business, after all, and brands want to keep you interested in returning while keeping up with their competition. If you’re a beauty product lover, you’ll know that there is a certain magpie-like tendency toward the glint or wink of the shiny new option. This isn’t helped by the fact that the beauty industry is as innovative in new product formulation as it is ingenious in marketing. There is always the sense that this new thing is the best in class. The ultimate concealer. The most efficient dry shampoo. The best foundation yet. New innovations do come and they can be incredibly beneficial. However, much of the time, new does not necessarily mean better. I’m very lucky to be able to test almost every new product launch to help you determine helpful from hype, and it occurred to me that, in all this fuss over the newest thing, we often neglect to mention the everyday products we love and rely on. The ones that offer something much better than “newness” – consistent, impressive performance. [ I’ve tested hundreds of hand creams, and this is the best one ] [ I’ve mastered the trick to applying this foundation, and never received as many compliments ] These are among the products I repurchase again and again; the products I’ll bash on the counter to winkle the last drops from, or order online just before I run out to ensure I don’t have to get by without them. Most are under €25, two are under €20, and all of them work every time and make my life a little easier (or more pleasant). The perfect dry shampoo does not yet exist, but Moroccanoil Dry Shampoo Dark Tones (€21 at millies.ie) is one that I always rebuy. The dark tone softens my roots but also prevents that dry shampoo chalkiness. It buys my very oily, fine hair an extra day between washes, and I love how it smells. I’ve used it for years and bought a new one just last week which, hopefully, will last a couple of months. Sculpted by Aimee Satin Silk Longwear Concealer (€18 at boots.ie) is excellent for coverage. Be careful to use it minimally – a heavy application of any full coverage concealer can look cakey and unflattering. I like to apply a little before my foundation to cover blemishes or particularly dark undereyes, and the shade range is excellent. Most of my favourite foundations offer light to medium coverage. That concealer needs to earn its keep, after all. Trinny London BFF De-Stress Foundation (€48 at trinnylondon.com) is a delectable light but buildable foundation that gives wonderful glow and a forgiving finish while still looking like skin. It’s great for dryer skin types, even though I’m prone to shine and can get away with it provided I use some powder. I’m on my fifth tube and will be buying a sixth. I’ve written about L’Oréal Paris Lash Paradise Mascara (€17 at pharmacies nationwide) many times before, but there’s a reason for that. It gives such enormous, dark lashes that it’s sometimes mistaken for falsies when you wear it. The downside is that you’ll certainly need an oil-based makeup remover to take it off. Crunchiness is the price you’ll pay for lift, curl and general oomph. Finally, a lip pencil is a highly underrated make-up tool and every make-up enthusiast should have one in a shade close to that of their natural lips. Worn alone with a nice lip balm, it allows you to skip lipstick, it can define and add mass, and will add significant polish to a finished make-up. Mac Lip Pencil in Whirl (€22 at MAC counters nationwide) has been a bestseller for the brand since the 90s. For pinker lips with a slightly blue undertone, it’s my go-to.