Clare Barrett is an award-winning actor who recently appeared in Medicine, written and directed by Enda Walsh and which received three Irish Times Theatre Award nominations in 2022. She is appearing in Gold in the Water, Project Arts Centre, Temple Bar, Dublin, until March 26th. I have grown into a saver but a saver with a penchant for frequent “dipping” into my savings, so realistically I’m probably not one or the other but a combination of both. I would always shop around for better value on irregular or bigger purchases such as flights, insurance, hotels, repairs, building work or anything to do with the house. Sometimes also for functional items like rehearsal clothes, runners and maybe rainwear for the bike. However, when it comes to groceries or leisure activities, I usually know whether I’m getting a deal so I don’t shop around for those items. Apart from our house, the most extravagant or expensive item I ever bought was a bracelet at a jewellery fair in Thailand during a 24-hour layover. I thought I had treated myself to a gorgeous bracelet for €100 – a bit extravagant, I thought, but something to mark the end of a successful job and tour. However, between the heat and the jet lag (that’s my excuse and I’m sticking to it), I did the currency conversion wrong and I HAD actually spent €1,000. Thank goodness it was on a credit card. It is a long time paid off now, though, and has become a much-loved item with a good origin story! I’m slightly embarrassed to say my shed. I don’t know whether it’s my advancing age or the fact that I had to store/fall over the contents of a shed indoors for 10 years that made me so excited, but organising and filling that shed gave me inordinate joy. Worth every penny. Bit of both, to be honest. I bought some clothing and a lot of books online during the pandemic, and I tried always to support Irish companies. Where possible, we shopped locally for everything else and had takeaways from our local restaurants for treats and special occasions. No, but deep down I wish I had the skills to haggle in certain circumstances. I have a friend who is brilliant at it. I gear myself up, determined to try, and then it comes out very tentatively, so they know instantly they don’t need to change a thing as I don’t have the guts to walk away! As with everyone I’m sure, my spending habits changed significantly in relation to dining out, cinema, events and socialising. While I haven’t stopped making purchases in these areas, I would say, personally speaking, it’s still not back to pre-pandemic levels. It might seem odd to some people, but I’d actually never bought clothes online before the pandemic. Necessity meant that I had to bite the bullet, however, and now I probably wouldn’t think twice about buying clothes online. [ Me & My Money: ‘I bought my first pharmacy, Meaghers, at the tender age of 28′ ] [ Me & My Money: ‘My biggest extravagance is my children. It’s never-ending’ ] I’m a nervous investor and would need to research something very deeply to take the plunge – even my pension is very conservative and low risk. My husband has dabbled, though, and he lucked out with some Tesla shares that meant we could afford a new kitchen. Elon Musk was good for something! Card, but only since Covid. I’ve become far too “tap happy” in the past couple of years and the ability to store cards on phones these days has made that worse. I like to always have some cash on me if I can, but in recent times it seems to stay in the wallet significantly longer. Leggings for Gold in the Water rehearsals. They are an Irish brand I like, and I got them for half price during an offer so I was delighted. I also think my colleagues will appreciate and think them value for money when I’m bending down during a warm-up! Yes, I wasn’t really a saver but in my 20s I worked with a woman who was an avid saver and, with her encouragement, I opened an account. Once I got going, I managed to buy my first car and pay for my insurance and since then I’ve saved for various things successfully over the years. Physically, yes, but not from investments. I have lost money, however, on bad products I have bought and getting the wrong people for repairs, and so on. I would take a gamble on a new product or a situation but I’m afraid I’m a very disappointing gambler. Despite going to the Galway races every year as a child, I’ve probably only progressed from 50p each way to €2 each way. The most I ever won on a bet was €80, which realistically might be the most I’ll ever win. You’ll not be asking me for gambling tips. I’d really love to say it’s not or that I don’t care about it but that’s not a reality. In our job, you must become very skilled in budgeting and making the money you earn stretch and last for leaner times. Where money is concerned, my wish would be that I would have enough not to worry or think about it as much as I do. I have €42 and a £2 coin. goldinthewatermusical.com In conversation with Tony Clayton-Lea