A chara, – Further to the letter from a number of TDs and Senators on the Ukraine war (Letters, February 25th), surely it is worthwhile having a look at the peace proposals put forward by the Chinese, instead of just noting and dismissing them, as seems to be the Government position. Among other points, the Chinese say: “On the Ukrainian issue, China believes that it is imperative to return to the Minsk II agreement, the starting point of this matter, as quickly as possible. The agreement is a binding instrument negotiated by the parties concerned and endorsed by the UN Security Council, and provides the only viable way out”. Senior Chinese diplomat Wang Yi noted that to his knowledge, Russia and the EU both support Minsk II, and says that in his recent telephone call with US secretary of State Tony Blinken, the US side also expressed its support. In this context, shouldn’t the relevant parties sit down together for a thorough discussion to work out a roadmap and timetable for the implementation of the agreement? What all parties need to do now is to earnestly shoulder responsibilities and work for peace, instead of increasing tensions, stoking panic, or hyping up war. Wang Yi also stressed that Ukraine should be a bridge for communication between the East and the West, not a frontier for confrontation between major powers. Regarding the security of Europe, all parties are free to raise their own concerns, and Russia’s reasonable security concerns should be respected and taken seriously. Wang Yi says that China hopes all parties will pursue dialogue and consultation to find a solution that is truly conducive to safeguarding the security of Europe. This seems to me to be a very serious proposal that deserves scrutiny. The alternative is to continue to escalate the war, with the accompanying loss of live and destruction of cities. As a neutral state (supposedly), surely this is the way that Ireland should be going? – Is mise, EOIN Ó MURCHÚ, Cluain Dolcáin, Baile Átha Cliath 22.