Seven people were reported dead and at least eight injured in Hamburg after a shooting in a Jehovah’s Witness church just after 9pm on Thursday evening. Hamburg police found 17 uninjured people in the building and warned that one or more perpetrators might still be at large. As the evening progressed, however, police said there were indications that the seventh dead person, found in an upper floor of the building, was the shooter. Little was immediately known about the assailant, but the Hamburg police said early on Friday morning that they believed there was just one. “All we know is that several people died here and that several people have been injured and have been brought to hospitals,” said Holger Vehren, a Hamburg police spokesperson. There had been an event at the hall at the time of the shooting, and many abandoned winter jackets could be seen hanging in the foyer of the three-story building in local news footage. Police were first called to the scene at 9.15pm local time. When they arrived several minutes later, they found the dead and the wounded and heard a final shot on the top floor of the building, Vehren said. When police forces reached that floor, they found another dead body. “Whether or not this was the perpetrator is not yet 100% clear, but at the moment we can assume it is,” Vehren said. The police are still investigating a motive and whether the attacker was specifically targeting Jehovah’s Witnesses, a small religious community in Germany, where there are about 175,000 adherents across the country and nearly 900 dedicated Kingdom Halls. The assault happened in Gross Borstel, a neighbourhood between Hamburg’s downtown and the airport. The hall itself is on a busy, six-lane road, neighbouring a gas station and other commercial properties. The Hamburg police asked that social media users refrain from conjecture on the motive or chronology of the attack while forensic teams worked. Warning of a “major operation” police sealed off the Alsterdorf area, north of the city centre, and urged locals to stay at home and others to avoid the area. Hamburg’s governing mayor Peter Tschentscher said he was “shaken” by the news of the shooting and expressed his “deepest sympathies” to the families of the dead. – Additional reporting by The New York Times