National Hurling League, Division 1A: Clare 0-22 Galway 1-24 Galway’s need was probably greater coming into this Allianz league fixture – not in the sense of needing points to prolong their interest in the competition, which as motivations go is an inscrutable mystery, but because they needed to get their team up and running after some poor results and performances, and with championship on the horizon. They fielded their strongest line-up to date and whereas they took some time to iron out the creases they were moving smoothly by the end. Both teams are now on four points and unlikely to advance any farther now that Cork are uncatchable at the top. They proved too strong for a disappointing Clare, who after a hot start had established a seven-point lead, but fell away as Galway picked up momentum in the third quarter and stamped their authority on the match in the second half. Asked had it been a good afternoon, regardless of the league implications, manager Henry Shefflin was in no doubt. “Of course, it is. Psychologically, no matter what, when you put in a couple of losses. I felt Cork wasn’t good and we didn’t respond well to the sending off. Limerick was better but wasn’t at the level that we require. “You’re hoping then because three-in-a-row is a bit of a ‘what are we doing’ kind of job. The players know that themselves and you’re looking forward and it was going to be a good test. We had nothing to really lose today, only go for it and that kind of attitude was what we brought to the game today.” There were good performances all around the field. Evan Niland’s dead-ball striking, whereas not flawless, was very good and kept the scoreboard humming for the visitors. Conor Cooney – who Shefflin made a special point of referencing afterwards – had a fine outing, in a more withdrawn role but one that didn’t blunt his effectiveness, as he ended up with 0-5 from play. It was also interesting that Gearóid McInerney, who has been playing in the full-back line, continued to do so even with the seasonal re-emergence of captain Daithi Burke, multi-decorated as an inside defender. He had a fine match, revelling in the more advanced role without neglecting defensive duties and finished with 0-2, picked off from exploiting the counter-attack and deft shooting to convert. “It was just important that we got him in,” said Shefflin. “He has only been training a couple of weeks. Gearóid has been performing very well at full-back and he [Burke] probably didn’t need to be chasing a nippy corner-forward inside first day out. “He got to grips with it, a couple of balls went over his head at the beginning of the game. Players need to be playing games. He has been out for a long time, great to have him back.” His centrefield was also busy with Ronan Glennon and Tom Monaghan performing energetically and getting scores. In that early phase though Clare looked terrific. They mopped up ball in defence and turned possession into attack. David Reidy caused havoc at first, his movement into space presenting a good target and his shooting earning two quick points. When Peter Duggan fired over a great score from the wing in the 14th minute, it pushed the scoreboard to 0-8 to 0-1, but for the remaining 56 minutes, Clare were outscored by 12. Unusually, Tony Kelly didn’t get any scores but looked in decent form in the first half, cutting a line ball into Cathal Malone’s patch for a score and getting in a nice hook in the 25th minute. “In games like this against good opponents you try to make hay while you can, when you’re on top,” said Clare manager Brian Lohan afterwards, “and then try and hang in there when the opposition is on top. They got on top – they’re good quality opponents and were a little bit stronger than us today.” It was a big disappointment for Lohan after the huge win in Wexford in the last round but the quality of the opposition that day was never going to be a reliable diagnostic in more searching contests. After a tit-for-tat third quarter, at the end of which there was only a point in it, Galway ahead 0-17 to 0-16, the visitors began to motor. Over the next eight minutes they outscored Clare by 1-4 to 0-1. Niland, Kevin Cooney (2) and replacement Seán Linnane all registered points and then the hitherto quiet-ish Conor Whelan burst onto a great puck-out to race in for the goal that finished the match as a contest. Lohan was happy with how Clare rallied and refused to throw in the towel – David Fitzgerald had four characteristically eye-catching points from distance – but it never looked likely to affect the outcome. Niland and Conor Cooney tidied things up with the last points of the day. “Obviously, we drove some bad wides, yes,” said Shefflin, “but there were aspects of the game that were pleasing. Coming down to Ennis is always a difficult challenge. Good to get the performance.” GALWAY: Éanna Murphy; Jack Grealish, Gearóid McInerney, TJ Brennan; Pádraic Mannion, Daithi Burke (0-2), Joseph Cooney (0-1); Cianan Fahy, Ronan Glennon (0-1); Tom Monaghan (0-2), Conor Whelan (1-0), Conor Cooney (0-5); Evan Niland (0-9, 0-5f, 1 65), Brian Concannon (0-1), Kevin Cooney (0-2). Subs: Seán Linnane (0-1) for Glennon (53 mins), David Burke for Fahy (68 mins), Tiernan Killeen for Burke (57 mins), Declan McLoughlin for Concannon (70 mins). CLARE: Eamonn Foudy; Adam Hogan, Conor Cleary, Paul Flanagan; Diarmuid Ryan, John Conlon, Cian Galvin (0-1); Cathal Malone (0-1), Tony Kelly (capt); Peter Duggan (0-1), David Fitzgerald (0-4), Ryan Taylor (0-1); David Conroy, Aidan McCarthy (0-7, 0-6f), David Reidy (0-3). Subs: Brandon O’Connell for Ryan (44 mins), Robyn Mounsey (0-1) for Conroy (46 mins), Séadna Morey (0-1) for Taylor (54 mins), Ian Galvin (0-2) for McCarthy 63 mins), Araon Shanagaher for Reidy (68 mins). Referee: Colm Lyons (Cork).