This week, four drinks with strong Irish connections for St Patrick’s Day, so you can raise a patriotic glass later in the week. Larkin’s is an ambitious independently owned craft brewery based in Kilcoole, Co Wicklow. They have just finalised their new vibrant packaging and are in the process of expanding and upgrading the brewery. David Dennison crafts an array of fascinating drinks from organic fruit grown on his Waterford farm. This includes wines, ciders, liqueurs, and an amazing Pét Nat made from a mix of apples, grapes, wildflowers, berries and honey. All are made without the addition of sulphites. He will shortly be open for tours — see Vikingirshdrinks.com. He will also have Hop It, a hop-flavoured cider, available for St Patrick’s Day. Laurent Miquel, a very talented winemaker, is married to Dubliner Neasa Corish A few eyebrows must have been raised when they decided to plant the Spanish Albariño grape on their high-altitude estate in Corbières in France. However, he has proven any doubters wrong. If you are tiring of Sauvignon Blanc, this is a great alternative. Rye whiskey is seen as an American speciality. It has been growing in popularity, although bourbon which is sweeter and more full-bodied, sells far more in the US. Rye was the original whisky used for sour, old-fashioned and Manhattan cocktails. The idea for an Irish rye (the first 100 per cent Irish, according to Powers) came from research by Irish Distillers archivist Carol Quinn into old mash bills used by Powers in the 19th century. It is produced from rye grown on the Cooney Furlong farm in Co Wexford. Light and full of fruity hops with a smooth finish. Perfect mini-session IPA. From: O’Briens, off-licences, select Centra and SuperValu. Organic, awaiting certification. An excellent off-dry cider with refreshing, pure orchard fruits. By itself, with roast pork or an Irish cheese platter. From: Direct, or from Ardkeen; World Wide Wines; Quish; Londis Dunmore Road, Castledermot; Harbour Stores, Dunmore East; Wallace’s Wellington Bridge; Pettitts Athy; SuperValu Newbridge, Rosslare, Dungarvan; Carryout Kilcullen. Lightly aromatic with crisp lemon zest and plump peach fruits, finishing dry. A great aperitif, or try it with some Irish oysters. From: Dunnes Stores Earthy with sweet vanilla, orange peel and peppery spice. Enjoy neat or in a Manhattan. From: Dublin Airport and online at PowersWhiskey.com.