The team has arrived at Murrayfield. Speaking of Sexton, himself and Russell provide a compelling subplot to the Murrayfield showdown, in a battle of two of the world’s best outhalfs. “In five games against Ireland where Russell was opposing Sexton, the latter has won them all. Curiously, they have only ever met once below international level, back in October 2017 in the Champions Cup, when Sexton was in imperious form with a 17-point man-of-the-match display in Leinster’s 34-18 bonus-point win over Glasgow at Scotstoun.” “They see the game so well, both of them,” says Brian O’Driscoll. “They can both pull the pass at the last second, brilliantly. I think they’re on a par in that.” [ Sexton and Russell provide a compelling subplot to Murrayfield showdown ] Earlier this week, Irish captain Johnny Sexton said he was ready to take on “best Scottish team I’ve ever played”. High praise for the Scots then. The outhalf has fully recovered from the groin strain which he sustained when the 162kg Uini Atonio fell on top of him in Ireland’s win over France. “I think some of the results show that, beating England regularly, beating France a few times, obviously beating Wales as well recently. So, they’ve had some big wins over the last number of years and they’ve been building nicely. “They’ve brought in a lot of new players over the last couple of years as well which has made the team stronger. So, it’s definitely the best, yeah.” [ Johnny Sexton ready to take on ‘best Scottish team I’ve ever played’ ] The Irish team look better equipped to cope with demands of big Six Nations occasion, writes rugby correspondent Gerry Thornley in his preview of today’s match. “For his part, Farrell has recalled six serious Test animals in Garry Ringrose, Johnny Sexton, Conor Murray, Dan Sheehan, Tadhg Furlong and Peter O’Mahony. Ringrose’s ability to play cat-and-mouse with Russell while shepherding that 20-metre channel to the touchline is arguably the most important of all. Having Caelan Doris at 8 and Bundee Aki at 12, and Jamison Gibson-Park back on a strong bench, also looks helpful, and this team have consistently offset individual rustiness through the quality of their training.” [ Scotland v Ireland: Irish team look better equipped to cope with demands of big Six Nations occasion ] Here is how the Six Nations table looks: Yesterday, ruthless France gave England a record Twickenham mauling as the visitors scored seven tries to record first win in the Six Nations at Twickenham for 18 years. A shocking scoreline of England 10 France 53. Elsewhere, Wales picked up their first Six Nations win in a wooden-spoon battle with dogged Italy. Rhys Webb inspired the visitors to a bonus point Six Nations win in Rome. Italy 17 Wales 29. Team news Andy Farrell has made six changes to the Irish starting XV with Tadhg Furlong returning at tight-head for his first game since early December. Garry Ringrose, Johnny Sexton, Conor Murray, Dan Sheehan and Peter O’Mahony are all restored as well, with Bundee Aki and Caelan Doris each reverting to their more familiar positions of inside centre and number ‘8′ respectively. The match-day 23 has also been strengthened by the return from injury of Jamison Gibson-Park and Robbie Henshaw to the replacements, where Cian Healy is preferred to David Kilcoyne. Ronan Kelleher, Jack Conan and Ross Byrne revert to the bench after starting in Ireland’s 34-20 win over Italy in Rome a fortnight ago. Ireland: Hugo Keenan (Leinster); Mack Hansen (Connacht), Garry Ringrose (Leinster), Bundee Aki (Connacht), James Lowe (Leinster); Johnny Sexton (Leinster), Conor Murray (Munster); Andrew Porter (Leinster), Dan Sheehan (Leinster), Tadhg Furlong (Leinster); Iain Henderson (Ulster), James Ryan (Leinster); Peter O’Mahony (Munster), Josh van der Flier (Leinster), Caelan Doris (Leinster). Replacements: Ronan Kelleher (Leinster), Cian Healy (Leinster), Tom O’Toole (Ulster), Ryan Baird (Leinster), Jack Conan (Leinster), Jamison Gibson-Park (Leinster), Ross Byrne (Leinster), Robbie Henshaw (Leinster). Scotland: Stuart Hogg; Kyle Steyn, Huw Jones, Sione Tuipulotu, Duhan van der Merwe; Finn Russell, Ben White; Pierre Schoeman, George Turner, Znder Fagerson; Richie Gray, Jonny Gray; Matt Fagerson, Jamie Ritchie (capt), Jack Dempsey Replacements: Fraser Brown, Jamie Bhatti, Simon Berghan, Scott Cummings, Hamish Watson, Ali Price, Blair Kinghorn, Chris Harris Hello and welcome to live coverage and build-up to the Ireland’s crucial Six Nations game against Scotland at Murrayfield. France’s bonus point victory over England means Ireland can’t win the championship today, but they can put it almost beyond doubt with a bonus point victory in Edinburgh, and leave themselves a match away from a Grand Slam at the Aviva next Saturday against England. Scotland have looked arguably as strong as they have since they won the Five Nations in 1999 and will provide a stern test for Andy Farrell’s men, who are back at almost full strength after some injury concerns. Kick off is at 3pm. @DavidGorman20.