The lives of many people with mild intellectual or neurological disabilities have opened up hugely in recent years. And with their strong commitment to equality for all, charities and social enterprises are examples of places which offer volunteering and part-time work opportunities for people who might struggle in full-time open employment. The Green Kitchen and Garden Shop in Walkinstown, Dublin is one such place. Brian Kellard, the operations manager of the cafe, says there is no reason a social enterprise can’t be a successful business. Showing me around the tastefully designed Green Kitchen cafe, the stylish garden shop next door and the smart backyard complete with growing areas and covered seating, he explains how the food and coffee has to be top quality and the working environment as realistic as possible. “I like to think of it as a journey of self-discovery for those who come in. First, you have the cafe experience and then as you peel back the layers, you see it’s a social enterprise and later that people with disabilities work here,” explains Kellard, who has been managing the cafe for the past four years or so. “It’s not like a charity cafe with dusty teapots. I try to give the staff as much empowerment as possible. There are some allowances for those with a disability and we are more accepting than other employers but I don’t offer any special treatment,” he explains. Stephen Lyons (31) has a part-time job as a kitchen porter at the Green Kitchen cafe and another part-time job stacking shelves in Lidl. “It’s important for people to know that people with disabilities can work. We all have the right to be part of the world of work,” says Lyons. He lives with his parents in Kilmainham and pays them rent because it would be too costly for him to live on his own. He says he enjoys both his jobs. “The challenge for me is to get to know people,” he explains. Gillian Farrell (34) has been working in the Green Kitchen cafe for about seven years. “I like it here. I’m okay when I’m doing one thing at a time. If I’m doing too many things together, I need to slow down. I tell people that I have autism and that it will take me a bit of time to do things but I’ll get them done,” she explains. Anna Brennan (29), who also works as floor staff in the Green Kitchen, says her confidence has grown since she started working there eight years ago. “I’m becoming more independent now. I feel included and relaxed. People can be themselves here and I feel comfortable with that,” says Brennan who gets two buses from her home in Co Meath to come to work. The Green Kitchen and Garden shop is a social enterprise run by Walk, an organisation in Dublin and Louth which supports people with intellectual disabilities. “We had community gardens in Clonmacnoise and Armagh Road in Crumlin and Dublin City Council [DCC] approached us to set up a community garden on what was then a derelict site,” explains the chief executive of Walk, Joe Mason. At that time the derelict buildings on Walkinstown Green that now house the Green Kitchen and Garden Shop were a magnet for antisocial behaviour and the council needed to do something about it. There wasn’t another cafe in this cluster of retail outlets in the middle of a big residential area. So, nine years ago, rather than just use the gardens, Walk offered to set up a social enterprise incorporating the buildings and outdoor space. Now with a paid staff of 31 (15 of whom have some form of disability) and eight people on work placement, the cafe is open Monday-Saturday from 8.30am-4pm and on Sundays from 9.30am-4pm. Many of the staff with disabilities at the Green Kitchen cafe have used the voluntary, training or residential services run by Walk, the vast majority of which are funded by the HSE. “Some people come to train to be a barista, to learn food preparation or front of house serving as a progressive pathway into open employment,” explains Mason. Since it was set up, 35 people got other jobs after working there and 12 others went on to do further studies. An added benefit is that the rooms at the back of the Green Kitchen can be used by community groups including Men’s Sheds and the recently set up Women’s Sheds. Members of the Men’s Shed also support the project by building flower beds and making planter boxes for commercial clients. When we visit, garden centre manager Colm Casserly is planting seeds with a volunteer for what will become the spring plants for sale in the garden shop. Meanwhile, another volunteer, Roward Howard is raking weeds out of the gravel. Howard, who uses the day services at Walk, also volunteers at FoodCloud, another social enterprise which sends surplus food from supermarkets to be used by charities and community centres. Sociable and friendly, he speaks about his different activities as his key worker, Caitlin Clarke, helps him manage his days. A covered courtyard next to the garden is hired out for special events with catering provided. The Green Kitchen cafe also provides external catering and has partaken in the fairs at Richmond Barracks in the nearby suburb of Inchicore. In 2022, a second 10-year licence for use of the building was signed with DCC. “It’s tailormade training and development for people who use our services but we remain reliant on the Department of Social Protection who funds two of our staff,” explains Mason. “Having these two staff members funded allows us to buddy up and give better on the job training,” adds Kellard. “We don’t look like a charity but we’ve got a mission. Our ultimate goal is to be a [financially] successful business as well as a successful social enterprise.”