Newcastle boss Eddie Howe is unsure whether to drop Joelinton after the midfielder was charged with drink-driving but Newcastle’s majority Saudi Arabian owners will not interfere with the manager’s decision. “Of course we’ve had discussions [regarding Joelinton with the owners]; we’re always very open with our discussions about events that happen at the football club and I think that’s only right,” said Howe as he prepared for Fulham’s visit to St James’ Park on Sunday. “But everything to do with Joelinton is left in my hands. Ultimately I have to pick the best team to win the game but I also have to take into account the situation around that. We will consider a lot of factors. It is a difficult situation.” The Brazilian’s arrest in the early hours of Thursday and impending magistrates court date astounded Newcastle’s manager who, while stressing that he appreciates the gravity of the situation, made it clear he intends to “support” and “help” one of his most important players. “It came very much as a shock,” said Howe, whose side are third in the Premier League and have reached the Carabao Cup semi-finals. “Joe is very remorseful and was very upset yesterday. He knows the seriousness of the situation. He understands his responsibilities. We also understand, as a club, the seriousness of the situation. Everything will be dealt with internally.” Joelinton has said he wants to play against Fulham but player and manager will engage in further discussions before the latter finalises his squad. “My relationship with Joe is very good,” said Howe. “I’ve sat down with him and will do so again. Joe’s a very good professional and is hugely passionate about his career and the club. I was very much surprised by what happened happened. But we will back him and support him, while also educating him and helping him; that is important. “He is very young, everyone makes mistakes. I think it is also important that we don’t overreact. I’m going to have to reflect and analyse and I’ll make a decision closer to the game in consultation with him. I’m not 100 per cent sure.” Given that Joelinton is 26 and his partner is expecting their third child, Howe might reasonably have expected him to demonstrate a greater sense of responsibility but he has not, for the moment at least, asked the Brazilian to apologise to his fellow players. “He hasn’t addressed the group and that’s not something that I’ve necessarily put pressure on him to do,” he said. “That’s his personal choice, but the players absolutely love Joe. There is a possibility that I will give him that opportunity, but I do think it’s down to the individual. Possibly, in these times, we have to be stronger together rather than become fractious and for it to give us problems.”