Sir, – To help Minister for Transport Eamon Ryan understand the oft-voiced angst of those living outside the larger urban centres, why don’t we organise a challenge? Stay in a house in rural Cavan for one week with a toddler requiring weekday transport to creche, a primary school child who needs to be collected before the school bus in the evening because they are being “eased into” the routine, and an older child at secondary school who needs to be brought to the bus stop (a 20-minute walk down a dark, narrow farm lane) an hour before the others need to leave in the morning. Add in a nine-to-five job that cannot be managed remotely plus unpredictable “out of hours” on-call work. And in case you are thinking of glorious cycling opportunities, the main road – when you get to it – is incredibly dangerous with blind bends and no cycle lanes. There is no local link serving the area because the Bus Éireann route is available (infrequently). If he succeeds in getting everyone there on time every day he could celebrate with a meal in a local restaurant, but no alcohol allowed unless he can source a taxi. And no – we don’t have trains either! – Yours, etc, RACHAEL CULLIVAN ELLIOTT, Drung, Co Cavan. Sir, – I watched with interest the recent furore over Dublin buses that “disappeared”. As a user of the 111 and 59 between Dalkey and Dún Laoghaire, I often experienced the sign displaying “Due” and then disappearing from the screen, making you feel like an eejit who had just imagined that there was a bus due. The bus you really hope to come is the last bus. On a cold Tuesday/Wednesday this week, I waited for the 12.05 from Dún Laoghaire to Dalkey. It was a no-show. After waiting 20 minutes, I abandoned hope. My taxi app was not working and there was not a taxi about so I decided to sleep in the back of my shop. As somebody who ran a business and relied on the bus service, it is simply not good enough. Thankfully I am closing my bookshop today and will not be at the mercy of this weirdly erratic service. Most politicians don’t use public transport. Most politicians don’t rent their accommodation. Most politicians won’t wait on hospital trolleys. That will tell you everything. My shop will close today (January 12th), with a half-price closing sale. Come along. If you can get a bus! – Yours, etc, KEVIN GILDEA, Kevin Gildea’s Brilliant Bookshop, Dún Laoghaire, Co Dublin. Sir, – What choices Dublin commuters have when they travel by public transport in Dublin – the Dart, the Luas, the Metro (eventually) and Dublin buses! When I travel by public transport from my house on the Beara peninsula to my family in rural Wexford, my only choice is to travel by bus. However, I suppose I can choose which hotel, guest house or Airbnb I will stay in on my three-day journey. I suppose I also have the option of a bench in Cork or Waterford bus stations, or a park bench in Wexford town, which doesn’t have a bus station. – Yours, etc, MICHAEL HARRINGTON, Beara, Co Cork.