Martin McDonagh’s The Banshees of Inisherin has been nominated for 10 Baftas, building on the film’s success at the Golden Globes last week and suggesting that it may also do well when this year’s Oscar nominations are announced, next Tuesday. Colin Farrell, who best-actor award was one of the film’s three Golden Globes wins, has received a Bafta nomination for leading actor for his performance as the spurned friend of Brendan Gleeson’s grumpy character in The Banshees of Inisherin. Gleeson was also nominated, for best supporting actor, along with his costar Barry Keoghan for his performance as Dominic Kearney in the film. Kerry Condon received a nomination for supporting actress. McDonagh is also in the running for best director, best original screenplay and outstanding British film at the Baftas ceremony next month. The Banshees of Inisherin was also nominated for best original score and best editing. Farrell will be up against other Irish talent for the leading-actor prize, as both Paul Mescal, for his performance in Aftersun, and Daryl McCormack, for his role in Good Luck to You, Leo Grande, have been nominated in the category. McCormack is also up for the EE Rising Star award. [ An unprecedented year for Irish talent: Donald Clarke on the 2023 Bafta nominations ] Colm Bairéad’s Irish-language film An Cailín Ciúin (The Quiet Girl), adapted from Claire Keegan’s novella Foster, landed nominations for best adapted screenplay and film not in the English language. The Wonder, an adaptation of Emma Donoghue’s novel, was also recognised. The drama, starring Florence Pugh as a Yorkshire nurse who is hired by a small Irish village in 1862 to watch over a young girl, was nominated for outstanding British film. Richard Baneham is also among today’s Irish nominees, for his visual effects on James Cameron’s Avatar: The Way of Water. [ Golden Globes 2023: the complete list of winners ] [ Golden Globes 2023: The Banshees of Inisherin wins three awards as Colin Farrell takes best actor ] An Irish Goodbye, by Tom Berkeley and Ross White, is up for best British short film. This year’s Bafta ceremony will take place on Sunday, February 19th. The SAG awards, where The Banshees of Inisherin is in contention for five prizes, take place the following week, on Sunday, February 26th. This year’s Oscar nominations will be announced on Tuesday, January 24th.