Sir, – The most worrying disclosure made by Prince Harry is that he was knocked over when his brother grabbed his necklace. A former captain in the British army is felled by a necklace grab. Oh dear. It doesn’t bode well for those who serve in a lesser capacity in their armed forces. – Yours, etc, AILEEN HOOPER, Stoneybatter, Dublin 7. Sir, – I’m glad I read Ed Power’s review of the Prince Harry interview, as it’s given me a newfound sympathy for the man; this specifically relates to the fact he had to ask his granny if he could keep his beard for his wedding day (“Prince Harry interview: A lost man looking for purpose in a life full of privilege”, TV & Radio, January 9th). If I worked in a family business where this was required of me, I’d hand in my resignation too. I must also note that I did not watch the 80-minute interview myself as I was washing my own beard that very evening. – Yours, etc, SIMON DELANEY, Bray, Co Wicklow. Sir, – With spare cash harder to come by these days, I think I can just about resist the temptation to buy a copy of Prince Harry’s memoir. – Yours, etc, MICHAEL CULLEN, Sandycove, Co Dublin. Sir, – Christmas is over for another year and the decorations are packed up and stored in the attic for another 11 months. As I wrap up the crib figures, I love to read the headlines of the old newspapers they are wrapped in. One headline, dated December 4th, 1995, grabbed my attention: “Royal jitters over Di’s Queen of Hearts quest”. I’m sure the late Princess Diana’s heart would break if she knew just how far her precious sons have drifted apart. Family quarrels are commonplace but it’s a real pity seeing this particular family’s dirty laundry being washed in public! – Yours, etc, DEE DELANY, Dublin 5. Sir, – The Prince Harry dispute with his family is sad; as an Irishman, I am rather indifferent to it, although I can’t avoid reading about it. What intrigues me most is that the term “The Palace”, as in “The Palace didn’t comment” or “No reply was received from the Palace”, is frequently mentioned, as if the Palace is a living, decision-making participant in the dispute between Harry and his family. Is there a civil servant or a group of civil servants in the background that is controlling the royal family, or is Harry’s father the decision maker? The person or persons making the decisions in this affair should be clearly identified. Even Harry himself doesn’t seem to know who they are. – Yours, etc, PAVEL MARIANSKI, Dungarvan, Co Waterford. Sir, – Does it appear that Prince Harry was trying to emulate the Prodigal Son? – Yours, etc, COLETTE FELLBAUM, Booterstown, Co Dublin. Sir, – Spare me the agony. – Yours, etc, MARY HARTE, Letterkenny, Co Donegal.