Today marks the 26th British-Irish Intergovernmental Conference (BIIGC). It is my second as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland and my first hosted jointly with Tánaiste Micheál Martin. The BIIGC is the forum under the Belfast (Good Friday) Agreement where the UK and Irish governments come together to discuss Northern Ireland, but it’s also an occasion to take forward wider shared priorities. Both governments share many interests, not least as cosignatories of the agreement. But in this era of profound geopolitical challenge in Europe, there are many other shared interests too, and I am looking forward to discussions on economic co-operation and growth, as well as on security, cyber and energy. The UK and Ireland face challenges with energy supply, and rising costs, following Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine, while enhanced UK-Ireland co-operation on cyberstrategy is an area that can benefit us both. So I’m delighted that [Minister for the Environment] Eamon Ryan and Energy minister Graham Stuart and cyber minister Julia Lopez from Britain will be joining our discussion. The UK government’s Legacy Bill, which will establish an independent commission capable of conducting investigations into Troubles-related deaths and serious injury, will also be on the agenda. This week we have tabled proactive amendments in advance of the next stage in the UK parliament. The UK Government is determined to deliver better outcomes for those most affected by the Troubles, and we welcome continued engagement with all stakeholders, including the Irish Government, as the legislation passes through parliament. Unfortunately, all of these discussions will be set against a backdrop of one overarching issue – the ongoing lack of a stable, accountable, devolved Government in Northern Ireland. The restoration of the devolved institutions in Northern Ireland is an absolute priority for my Government. I know the Irish Government shares my desire to see the return of powersharing as soon as possible and we continue to urge all parties to take up their responsibilities. We also both want to see a resolution to the problems we face over the protocol through negotiation between the UK government and EU Commission. I am very conscious that the conference takes place on the final day of the Executive formation period, which expires at midnight. From tomorrow, if there is no Executive, I will once again be under a legal duty to hold elections to the NI Assembly in the next 12 weeks. I will use the next few weeks I have available to me to assess carefully all options about what happens next and to continue to talk to all interested parties before I make any decisions. This is not a situation any of us want to be in. The people of Northern Ireland deserve to have the votes that they cast in May honoured, they deserve locally elected decision-makers getting back to work, delivering on the issues that matter most to them. I have already had to make difficult decisions in the absence of an Executive, setting a budget to protect public services and finances. If this stalemate continues, sadly, I will have to do more for the 2023-2024 budget. I will also keep under review the powers provided to civil servants that are due to expire on June 5th, but it is my sincere hope that we will have an Executive in place well before that point. As we approach the 25th anniversary of the Belfast  Agreement, we should all be reflecting on the enormous transformation that the agreement enabled and commit ourselves again to the vision it set out for a prosperous and inclusive Northern Ireland in which everyone can participate and thrive. The absence of Northern Ireland institutions undermines this optimistic vision. The UK government and Irish Government, therefore, share the fundamental objective of the return of the Belfast Agreement institutions, to build an even brighter future that people in Northern Ireland expect and deserve.