The controversial forestry deal struck between Coillte and British asset managers Gresham House cannot be undone, according to the Minister for Agriculture, who indicated that the Government will move to avoid similar deals being made in the future. Charlie McConalogue told the Oireachtas committee on agriculture that the agreement was “not our preferred option”. Under the deal, Gresham House will manage the Irish Strategic Forests Fund which will provide up to €200 million to assemble a portfolio of 12,000 hectares of new and existing forests. An initial €25 million has been invested by Ireland’s sovereign development fund, the Ireland Strategic Investment Fund (ISIF). The arrangement has been met by significant opposition across all political parties, with Sinn Féin describing it as a “land grab”. Social Democrats TD Holly Cairns said the Government should be encouraging farmers to plant forests rather than relying on international investment funds to do so. Many Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael rural backbench TDs have also criticised the arrangement including Jackie Cahill, chair of the agriculture committee, and Longford-Westmeath TD Joe Flaherty. The issue was discussed at length at the committee, where Mr McConalogue said that he and Minister of State Pippa Hackett would prefer to see farmers planting forestry on their own land. However, he said the partnership between Coillte and Gresham House could not be halted at this stage. “Coillte and ISIF have entered into binding contractual arrangements in respect of this initiative, which has commenced its work, the afforestation element of which is expected to last for five years,” he said. Mr McConalogue said that when he and Ms Hackett came into office the forestry sector was “on life support” with 6,000 licences caught up in a “broken appeals system”. He said that situation has been addressed and the Government has introduced a “Rolls-Royce” standard €1.3 billion afforestation programme to increase the volume of land under trees from 11 per cent nationally to 18 per cent. He said this was a farmer-focused programme. He said that in the interim, Coillte had explored other measures to breathe life into a moribund sector and the deal with Gresham was one of those. He said the fund would deliver only 3.5 per cent of the 100,00 hectares of new forests targeted up to 2050. “We also must be realistic. For various reasons, forestry plantations are not where we want them to be. Afforestation rates have not reached their heyday of the late 90s and early 2000s for a raft of reasons,” he said. He said Coillte’s decision to establish the €200 million strategic fund did not require Government sign-off. He said he and Ms Hackett had met Coillte and ask it to examine ways in which it could work more closely with farmers and communities in terms of reaching their targets. “We are stating clearly here today. This type of strategy is not our preferred option for strategic partnerships in the sector. Again, our preferred option is for farmers to plant trees on their own land,” he said.