The Dáil resumes today after the Christmas break for what is certain to be a busy parliamentary term. Already the political temperature has been raised by the resignation of junior minister Damien English and now Minister for Public Expenditure Paschal Donohoe finds himself in the gunsights of the Opposition for his failure to properly declare an election expense in 2016. His Government colleagues are determined to circle the wagons around Donohoe, but Opposition parties are unlikely to let the matter drop. The Coalition is likely to be under constant pressure in the Dáil on the two issues that will continue to dominate the agenda: healthcare and housing. Last year, the pressures in the housing market and the shortcomings of the health service were constantly cited in Dáil exchanges as examples of the Government’s failures, and these continue to be the issues which resonate most with voters. The pressures in hospitals during the post-Christmas period, which saw record numbers on hospital trolleys and appalling overcrowding in emergency departments, have abated somewhat as a spike in infections has eased and hospital authorities have got to grips with logjams in patient flow. Healthcare staff have responded superbly to a desperate plea from the Minister for Health Stephen Donnelly to work weekend shifts, while extra beds sourced from private hospitals and additional hours from GPs have all helped. But these are temporary fixes for a problem that will certainly arise again in the future if the required political leadership is not shown and administrative action does not follow. The Opposition should keep holding the Government’s feet to the fire, not just on the investment new healthcare capacities require, but on the workplace reforms necessary to make that investment pay off in improved patient care. The housing crisis is, for many younger people, the most visible sign of the Government’s failures, and so is its most exposed political flank. True, there are no quick solutions and yes, housebuilding has jumped in the past year. But demand continues to grow and supply is in danger of stuttering this year. There is much talk of new departures, such as the introduction of some form of tax incentives to promote building in some sectors. If the Coalition proceeds on this path, it is vital that the Dáil performs its function to carefully scrutinise and critique Government proposals. This Dáil term will see new Taoiseach Leo Varadkar and Sinn Féin leader Mary Lou McDonald renew their rivalry across the floor of the chamber. Varadkar has sought to portray the next election as a fight between their two parties, a characterisation that also works to McDonald’s advantage. Voters have previously declined the invitation to see Irish politics in such binary terms. But their clashes will be a feature of the term ahead.