Chelsea are stepping up attempts to agree a new contract with Mason Mount in the face of the growing prospect of Liverpool trying to buy the midfielder this summer. Mount has 18 months on his deal and Chelsea, who are weighing up whether to increase their offer for Brighton’s Moises Caicedo, have yet to meet his wage demands. The uncertainty has led to questions over whether negotiations will come to a successful conclusion, and Liverpool, who are planning a rebuild of their midfield, are prepared to act on their interest in the England international if the situation drags on. Chelsea would be reluctant to lose Mount, particularly to one of their closest rivals, and remain optimistic they will convince the 24-year-old to stay. Mount, who has been at Chelsea since the age of six, is popular with supporters, and has been one of the team’s best performers since breaking into the squad in 2019. However, Mount, whose £75,000-a-week (€85,000) wage makes him one of the lower earners, wants Chelsea to prove they value him. There is a risk of the club making one of their most dedicated players feel underappreciated. Chelsea are willing to make Mount a sizeable offer, though terms would need to be pitched at a reasonable level. Talks are due to resume and Chelsea are ready to be as generous as possible. It would not be in Chelsea’s interests for negotiations to move slowly. Liverpool are monitoring the situation closely, and have been putting plans in place for a summer move. Mount has also attracted interest from Juventus. Liverpool, who host Chelsea on Saturday, are keen to refresh their ageing midfield. Jürgen Klopp’s side have slipped to ninth – level on points with Chelsea – and are in danger of failing to qualify for the Champions League. Liverpool are also interested in Caicedo, Borussia Dortmund’s Jude Bellingham and Wolves’ Matheus Nunes. Chelsea are also looking to strengthen their midfield and have had a £55 million bid for Caicedo rejected. It is understood that Brighton, who want £75 million, have started to look for potential replacements for the Ecuador international. But they are under little pressure to sell, and Chelsea, who are considering signing a defensive midfielder on loan, could wait until the summer before trying again to buy the 21-year-old. They are preparing to announce the signing of the England Under-21 forward Noni Madueke from PSV Eindhoven in a £35 million deal. - Guardian