Gardaí have arrested a man for questioning after an 89-year-old patient was allegedly killed in a ward in Cork City hospital. A patient (32) allegedly attacked the victim with a walking frame in a six-bedroom general medical ward at the Mercy University Hospital at about 5.30am on Sunday. The 89-year-old, who was from Berrings, Co Cork, suffered serious head injuries in the assault and was pronounced dead at the scene. The other patients in the ward raised the alarm and a male nurse allegedly suffered a broken finger while trying to restrain the violent patient. It took several staff to subdue the man. Gardaí were called and members of the Armed Support Unit assisted in arresting the man on suspicion of murder. He has been brought to the Bridewell Garda station. The victim’s body remains at the scene which has been cordoned off pending an forensic examination by a garda technical team. Four patients who witnessed the assault have been moved to another ward. Gardaí have requested the services of the State Pathologist’s Office and it’s expected that Assistant State Pathologist, Dr Margot Bolster, will carry out a postmortem later. The man arrested, who is from Churchfield, is being detained under Section 4 of the Criminal Justice Act which allows suspects to be held for up to 24 hours before they have to be charged or released. Gardaí are liaising with hospital management and are seeking to verify reports that the suspect was admitted to Mercy University Hospital on Saturday via the Emergency Department. Gardaí have not yet released the name of the deceased, but The Irish Times has learned that he is a farmer from Berrings, who is survived by three adult children and eight grandchildren. This is the second tragedy in a short period to affect the family. The man’s wife died earlier this month and the couple previously lost a daughter. The Garda Press Office have confirmed that they have appointed a Family Liaison Officer to assist the man’s family and they have said they are not looking for anyone else in relation to his death. The MUH has issued a statement confirming an incident took place and that the hospital is providing counselling services to patients and staff affected.