Chancellor Olaf Scholz will announce a delivery of 14 Leopard 2 battle tanks to Ukraine today, triggering a cascade of similar pledges from other Nato members, including an expected US contribution of up to 30 M1 Abrams. Germany’s major policy shift, after months of resistance and angry exchanges with Nato partners, has been greeted with relief – but also anger – in Berlin and beyond. The Kremlin said the West would regret encouraging Kyiv’s “delusion” it could win on the battlefield, while Russia’s ambassador to the US said the prospect of Abrams tank deliveries to Ukraine was “another blatant provocation”. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who turns 45 today, gave a cautious welcome to the news while warning of a looming fresh wave of Russian aggression. Ukraine’s deputy foreign minister Andrij Melnyk, a vocal former ambassador to Berlin, called Germany’s shift – and the prospect of Abrams tanks to follow – a “double ka-boom” that was “without doubt a real breakthrough and game-changer for Ukraine on the battlefield”. Poland, Finland, Norway, the three Baltic countries and the Netherlands have signalled their readiness to send tanks as part of a Nato alliance. Mr Scholz is expected to make his announcement during parliamentary questions at noon (Irish time) in the Bundestag, while unnamed Biden administration officials have told several US media outlets to expect a White House announcement today on Abrams tanks. In recent weeks Chancellor Scholz insisted Germany would only send battle tanks if Nato remained united and the US contributed M1 Abrams tanks; Washington refused, saying its tanks were ill-suited to Ukraine’s needs. After months of heated Berlin debate over whether battle tanks from Nato countries would escalate the war, dragging the alliance into the conflict, the tank shift has been widely welcomed in German political circles. Mr Scholz’s junior coalition partners Social Democratic Party (SPD), the Greens and Free Democratic Party (FDP), called the news a “relief”. German media outlets were largely positive on the decision, with the best-selling Bild tabloid writing: “May the Leopard tanks save many innocent lives by scaring off Putin’s troops of terror.” Criticising the decision as a “very dangerous mistake”, Germany’s hard left Linke party predicted the tank deliveries would start a “slide into escalation” of the war. “The really big problem we have in Ukraine right now is air strikes, that Russia is bombing civilians and destroying civilian infrastructure is criminal,” said Ms Janine Wissler, the Linke leader. “It’s not entirely clear to me how the delivery of the Leopard battle tanks is supposed to solve this problem.” Speaking before the German announcement, Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg said he expects alliance members to agree higher defence spending targets later this year. The current goal, not yet met by all members, is to spend two per cent of economic output on defence. “I assume that there will be a new target for defence spending when we meet for the Nato summit in Vilnius in July this year,” said Mr Stoltenberg to Germany’s Die Welt daily. “The two per cent target was initially for a decade, so until 2024, so we have to update it now ... everybody sees that we need to invest more.”