There is an improved atmosphere between the European Commission and UK Government in relation to Northern Ireland protocol negotiations and “much better mood music” than at any period since the Brexit referendum, Taoiseach Leo Varadkar has said. Mr Varadkar said there is increased trust and flexibility on both sides despite “big differences and gaps” that will be hard to resolve. Speaking in the Dáil on Wednesday, the Fine Gael leader said he had spoken with President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen on January 11th via phone and British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak on January 23rd following questions from his party colleague Alan Farrell on the Northern Ireland protocol. “There is an improved atmosphere between the European Commission and UK Government, a much better atmosphere, a much better back drop, much better mood music than I’ve seen or heard than at any period since the Brexit referendum was passed,” Mr Varadkar said. “There is increased trust, I think there is increased flexibility on both sides, and also increased confidentiality which is also very important and we’ve all agreed to make sure that these talks and negotiations can happen in a confidential setting. “But that’s not to say there aren’t big differences and gaps, there are and those gaps will be hard to close and those differences will be hard to resolve.” The Taoiseach said he spoke with the British Prime Minister about the protocol, restated the Government’s objection to UK legacy legislation and also concerns around the proposed electronic travel authorisation which could “adversely affect EU citizens and non-EU citizens trying to go from north to south”. Mr Varadkar said in terms of a timeline for an agreement on the protocol, “there is no definite timeline, there is no deadline”. “I think we would all love to see a resolution for the 25th anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement or if not before St Patrick’s Day, but I can’t say that that’s possible at this stage and there is no particular deadline in that regard,” he said. He said while speaking with President von der Leyen, they discussed current negotiations between the EU and UK on the protocol. “We welcome the improved atmosphere and engagement in the negotiations on the protocol and expressed our shared desire to see joint solutions to issues that have arisen for people and businesses in Northern Ireland and its implementation,” Mr Varadkar said.