There is “no requirement” for former minister Damien English to make a Dáil statement following his resignation despite demands from the opposition that he do so, the Taoiseach has said. A spokesman Leo Varadkar said on Sunday that as Mr English is no longer a minister “there is no requirement for him to make a statement to the Dáil about his financial affairs”. Mr Varadkar’s spokesman said that this is “now a matter for the Standards [in Public Office] Commission (Sipo)” and that Mr English “will have to answer any questions it puts to him and provide any documents it requests”. “He should be afforded due process and a fair hearing in that regard,” the spokesman said. It comes after the Social Democrats confirmed they would be submitting a complaint to Sipo regarding contributions Mr English made on the sale of loans secured on Irish property to so-called “vulture funds”. Two loans secured on properties owned by Mr English were purchased by two of these funds following the financial crisis. According to the code of conduct for office holders, if they have material interest in a matter in the house, they must make a declaration to that effect. Mr English’s loans were first reported by the website The Ditch. Róisín Shortall, the Social Democrats co-leader, said on Sunday that she would be making a complaint to Sipo about a potential conflict of interest in respect of Oireachtas contributions made by Mr English on vulture funds. People Before Profit TD Paul Murphy has already submitted a complaint to Sipo on a separate matter reported by the same website, relating to the non-declaration of a property in Castlemartin, Co Meath on the Dáil register of interests. Mr English has said he did not have to declare the property because it was being used by him and his family. Mr English resigned on Thursday after it emerged that he incorrectly told Meath County Council that he owned a property already when applying for planning permission for another property. The opposition is seeking to turn up the heat on the Government over the issue. The Sinn Féin whip, Padraig Mac Lochlainn, wrote to the Dáil’s business committee asking that time be put aside for a Dáil statement by Mr English. Louise O’Reilly, the Sinn Féin enterprise spokeswoman, has written to the Dáil committee on members interests seeking that it meet to discuss the recent developments. She is also asking that it discuss a complaint made to Sipo regarding Minister for Public Expenditure Paschal Donohoe’s election expenses. Mr Donohoe apologised and submitted an amended financial statement to the political ethics watchdog after revelations that he did not correctly account for a donation he received seven years ago. In addition, he will recuse himself from any ministerial responsibilities regarding the Standards in Public Office Commission while it examines the issue, which emerged in the complaint to the body.