Unlike the worst of times of the Covid-19 pandemic, the current crisis pummelling the health service has no public manifestation outside of overcrowded hospital emergency departments. In contrast to the lockdowns, pubs and restaurants remain open, there are no curbs on public gatherings and international travel is unrestricted. All of this is, of course, welcome; nobody wishes to return to those lonely days of isolation and social distancing. Nor do we need to. But should some of the basic measures that helped us through the pandemic not be reconsidered during this current wave of winter infection? As hospitals are overrun with the surge in respiratory infections such as influenza, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), Covid-19 and other illnesses, it would make sense to consider a simple measure such as mask-wearing on public transport, at least for the remaining weeks of winter. In the early days of the pandemic, it was clear that mask-wearing was at its most effective when everyone wore them. Today, it is rare to see more than a handful of people wearing masks on public transport, the most crowded public setting that many find themselves in. This week, the Labour Party called for mandatory mask-wearing on public transport and in congregated settings for the months of January and February, adding its voice to the call from the Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation for tougher advice on the issue. It might not be a popular measure with some but the INMO evoked memories of the collective action of the pandemic. It said that the introduction of compulsory mask-wearing was a “responsible thing” for policymakers and the Government to do “when hospitals are not coping and people’s lives are at higher risk.” Before Christmas, the chief medical officer, Dr Breda Smyth, called on people using public transport to wear masks as an act of solidarity. This appears to have fallen on deaf ears. After prolonged lockdowns, people may feel that they have sacrificed enough in the name of collective action. At an individual level, the low take-up of booster vaccines suggests that people are not even taking personal action to protect themselves. About half of all people aged 80 and over and almost half of people in their 70s have received their third booster dose. Take-up is even lower for younger age groups; just 17 per cent of 60-somethings have availed of a third booster dose. Thankfully, Covid-19 is no longer as virulent as it once was – but it hasn’t gone away. Now there is a new, highly transmissible variant known as XBB.1.5 or “Kraken” starting to circulate. Getting a booster jab and putting on a mask on public transport appear smart measures, for people individually and for the good of wider society and our health service.