Sir, – I refer to your editorial in relation to State responses to managing the unfortunate steep rise in refugees seeking safety here (“Housing refugees – State has to step up its response”, January 14th). Of late, much has been made by refugee advocates, media and politicians of the protests against refugee facilities in East Wall and Ballymun. Consistently, these protests have been described as far right, extremist and racist. East Wall and Ballymun are what are termed working-class areas by some. Some even go as far to apply the term marginalised. Since February 25th, 2022, the number of citizens from other jurisdictions seeking asylum and international protection in this jurisdiction is about 65,000. The principal factor in this figure is of course the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Back in late 2015, the then-minister for local government Alan Kelly signed a statutory instrument exempting the use of hotels, bed and breakfasts and other similar institutions from the need to have planning permission. As a result, this cleared the way for the State to meet its international protection liabilities by leasing hotels, etc, for this purpose. This of course removed the need for any form of statutory consultation with local communities, as would be the case in the standard public planning process. These exemptions were further widened in December 2022 to schools, community halls, sports halls and third-level campuses. As one who worked in the local authority planning system, I actually agree with and understand the need for these exemptions. The very same Nimby mentality currently hampering affordable housing provision would doubtless have hampered the provision of the refugee facilities that we have. In January 2017, I wrote to The Irish Times and wondered why, even then, asylum seekers were being settled in Ballaghaderreen, Killarney, Ennis, Longford and other locations well clear of the greater Dublin area. I made the not unreasonable point that the even postcodes of Dublin contained the best array of employment, educational and social facilities in the State. Yet no such settlements were located in these areas. Many hotels in the Midlands and the West are in use to shelter those in need. But the hotels in Dublin 2 and Dublin 4 remain in their intended use. I live in Rosslare Harbour. Within one very modest community, we now have three refugee facilities. They are well run. They are supported. Those within are in jobs and school. We celebrated Christmas with our neighbours. But what is being totally ignored by the Dublin media and political class is the imbalance of where these facilities are located. There are no far-right protesters blocking the leafy streets of Dublin 2, Dublin 4 and Dublin 6. There is no need. It appears far more convenient to focus on the nasty taunts –and they are nasty – by a few in the current protests than to actually acknowledge that perhaps the communities may have a point? Particularly when affordable housing has become the stuff of dreams for many of all classes and nationalities. In that 2017 letter, I asked this question: How long will it take the D4 media and establishment to pounce on any perceived opposition to refugee settlement in rural or disadvantaged areas and label it as far right and racist? It looks like the question is being answered. – Yours, etc, LARRY DUNNE, Rosslare Harbour, Co Wexford.