Paschal Donohoe is conducting a review of his records after a complaint against him was made to the Standards in Public Office Commission (Sipo). The complaint relates to an allegation that a donation was received in the form of services provided at the time of the 2016 election. It further alleges that failing to declare the donation was a breach of the Electoral Act. The Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform was elected for a second term as the President of Eurogroup, the working group of EU finance ministers, in December. “The Minister is aware of a complaint made to Sipo. He will engage with Sipo on the matter,” a spokesperson for the Minister said on Saturday. The Minister has always held himself to the highest standards in the conduct of his work. He is now conducting a full review of all records from that time.” Sipo is assessing the claim and considering whether further action is to be taken. Mr Donohoe was first elected in 2011 as TD for Dublin Central. He was re-elected in 2016, and was appointed to the Public Expenditure and Reform brief in its wake. Sinn Féin Public Expenditure and Reform spokeswoman Mairéad Farrell called for immediate clarification from Mr Donohoe, adding: “He is the Minister with responsibility over SIPO, it is concerning that he is being investigated by them. This is now the perfect opportunity for the Minister to grant the crucial additional power which SIPO have long been calling for and which his Government have failed to grant them. Namely the ability to conduct investigations without the need of a formal complaint to start the process.” A Labour spokesman encouraged the minister to engage fully over the issue, adding: “As Minister with responsibility for ethics legislation and the updated legislation which is due to be published early this year, the Minister will be acutely aware of his particular responsibilities in this regard. “We understand from media reports that Minister Donohoe is undertaking an examination of all records that might relate to the complaint they have received. “We would encourage him to complete this exercise swiftly and to provide SIPO with all the information they require to make a determination on this complaint.”