Sinn Féin has confirmed that it only discovered its failure to declare an opinion poll it had commissioned during the 2020 election after it received a query on the matter from the Irish Times in December 2021. The confirmation contradicts comments by Sinn Féin TDs Eoin Ó Broin and Sorca Clarke on Wednesday suggesting that the party discovered the omission itself. Under legislation on spending during elections parties must declare spending on all polls conducted around the time of the election to the Standards in Public Office Commission (Sipo). Dublin Mid-West TD Mr Ó Broin had publicised the result of a Survation online poll that showed the party ahead of its rivals in a social media post three days before ballots were cast in 2020. Sinn Féin failed to disclose the opinion poll - which cost almost €7,000 - in its expenses declaration to Sipo for the 2020 General Election. The party said: “When submitting returns to SIPO, one invoice was accidentally omitted; due to staff working remotely as a result of public health restrictions. “When this came to our attention, the statement was immediately amended and the invoice sent to them. “Sinn Féin were well within the spending limits laid down for the 2020 general election.” Earlier this week Fine Gael Minister of State Peter Burke accused Sinn Féin of being “absolute hypocrites” in how it responds to such issues. His remarks followed criticism by Sinn Féin of Minister for Public Expenditure Paschal Donohoe over his failure to properly record 2016 election expenses paid by a friend. Sinn Féin responded to Mr Burke’s remarks saying: “Fine Gael are desperately trying to distract from the failure of Minister Paschal Donohoe to answer questions about a political donation to him.” Asked on Wednesday about the omission of the opinion poll from Sinn Féin’s declaration to Sipo on RTÉ Radio’s Drivetime show Mr Ó Broin said: “We discovered that error, we rectified it immediately with an updated report to Sipo. “We didn’t wait years and years and years for journalists to expose it and only then fix the matter and therefore we acknowledged the mistake, we fixed it in an appropriate manner and we are fully compliant.” Longford-Westmeath TD Ms Clarke told a different RTÉ broadcast that it was her understanding that the issue was discovered by “the individual who was looking after the invoices”. Sinn Féin confirmed on Thursday that it only discovered the error when the Irish Times brought it to its attention adding: “It was immediately corrected.” Sipo has said Sinn Féin informed it of the error in its February 2020 election expenses statement in December 2021. The watchdog requested an amended statement which was published in January last year. Mr Ó Broin said on Thursday: “You’re absolutely correct. The matter was brought to our attention by the Irish Times... “However, my point stands that as soon as the matter was brought to our attention we rectified the records immediately and are now fully compliant with the Sipo rules.” He said in relation to Paschal Donohoe that the issue of his 2016 election returns were brought to his attention twice - in 2017 and in 2022 - and “in both instances his position as there was nothing to see here and he failed to amend the records.” Mr Ó Broin argued that there is a “world of difference” between that and Sinn Féin’s immediate move to correct the record adding: “that is why Paschal Donohoe is in such hot water at present.” Ms Clarke said her understanding of the situation on Wednesday was “not correct” while adding: “the general point still stands” and as soon as the omitted opinion poll was brought to the attention of Sinn Féin “it was rectified.”