Incidents of violence and intimidation towards public representatives have gone to a “new level” and the issue is something politicians across all parties need to come together collectively on, Tánaiste Micheál Martin has said. The Fianna Fáil leader said an informal group of TDs and senators could be formed to come up with a “comprehensive approach” to dealing with the issue. Mr Martin was speaking in the Dáil on Thursday after Labour leader Ivana Bacik noted that in the last number of weeks “we’ve seen multiple incidents of intimidation and violence against public representatives”. Ms Bacik highlighted a “startling” article in last Saturday’s Irish Times which showed the “gendered nature of that intimation” and said other colleagues had spoken of their own “harrowing experiences”. The Dublin Bay South TD said others had not spoken publicly as asked what plans the Government had to ensure there was a cracking down of such behaviour. She suggested the establishment of a dedicated resource office in Leinster House to provide supports to representatives at local and national level. In response, Mr Martin said the matter was very serious and that there had been further revelations including from Social Democrats TD Holly Cairns, who revealed she was left “absolutely terrified” when an online stalker started showing up at her home. The Tánaiste said such incidents were more frequent and promised to speak to Government colleagues about “wrap-around supports”. “I understand there is a desire to create a security fund which would assist members in taking precautionary measures that would at least give some protection to members who could be coming under attack or potential assault,” he said. Mr Martin said he, like many people, had been guilty of absorbing a lot of abuse, but added that “I think it’s gotten to a new level and it’s something we need to collectively come to grips with in a comprehensive way”. Regarding a security fund, Ceann Comhairle Seán Ó Fearghaíl said a “detailed and comprehensive plan” has been submitted to the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform.