Chelsea 1 Crystal Palace 0 On a day when the memory of the late, great Gianluca Vialli acted as a unifying force, it felt imperative for Chelsea’s players to show pride in the badge. Anything less would have been a betrayal. Chelsea’s fans simply wanted evidence of some heart, anything to suggest that this underperforming squad is not trying to force out another manager, and the end result was that Graham Potter could feel the pressure on his shoulders lightening by the time this frayed contest was over. The relief was immense when Kai Havertz, accepting the responsibility that comes with a £62m fee, barrelled in a brilliant header midway through the second half. Havertz’s sixth goal of the season had calmed the noise. It brought Chelsea only their second win in 10 league games and, although it took some fine saves from Kepa Arrizabalaga to keep Crystal Palace at bay, victory at least gives Potter some breathing space. Chelsea’s head coach will know there is room for improvement. Yet with 10 players missing through injuries and suspension, a glimpse of the old defiance was welcome. Was it perfect? No. But Chelsea held firm, with Thiago Silva magnificent as Palace pushed, and they will hope to build. After all, money is not a problem. Their new signing, Mykhailo Mudryk, was here to watch his new side and more incomings are likely before the end of the month. Vialli, who once convinced foreign stars to flock to this corner of west London, would surely approve. The growing angst around Stamford Bridge would subside before kick-off, distant memories of past glories stirring during the poignant tributes to Vialli. Here was a reminder of an era before anyone in English football had heard of Roman Abramovich or Todd Boehly. Vialli was there when Chelsea were starting to establish themselves at the top and, as the former players gathered in the centre circle to remember the club’s old manager, it was tempting to imagine that the emotion would serve as inspiration for today’s struggling team. The problem with that idea, of course, was that it would require Chelsea to display a level of coherence that has so proved beyond them under Potter. There was energy to begin with, a couple of dangerous runs from Lewis Hall, but would it be accompanied by quality? The crowd seemed unconvinced. The first groans arrived when Havertz lost possession in the 15th minute and the jitters would grow as Palace edged into the game. [ Live Premier League table, latest scores, results and fixtures ] Michael Olise clearly fancied his chances against Hall, a youngster whose attacking zest from left-back is not quite matched by his defensive awareness. Hall was not tight enough to the Palace winger early on and the opening goal almost followed. Olise’s cross was not dealt with properly and Tyrick Mitchell was unlucky at the far post, Arrizabalaga blocking the left-back’s hooked shot. There was an edginess to Chelsea, who made five changes after their defeat at Fulham. With Kalidou Koulibaly dropped, Benoît Badiashile made his debut in defence after his £33.8m move from Monaco. The foundations felt fragile. At one stage Mitchell leapt to keep a long ball in play on the left, won a 50-50 and crossed. Arrizabalaga, who would later save a header from Jeffrey Schlupp, was soon flying to his left to repel Olise’s volley. Watching from an executive box, Mudryk could have been forgiven for wondering whether it was too late to give Arsenal a call. The £89m Ukraine winger had completed his medical before signing an eight and a half year deal earlier in the day and Chelsea had made great play on social media of gazumping their London rivals. But Mudryk cannot be expected to solve this team’s ills on his own. There is an argument that the 22-year-old is an extravagance. Chelsea, who are due to sign the RB Leipzig forward Christopher Nkunku this summer, have bigger holes elsewhere. Cover for the injured Reece James is needed at right-back. More oomph is required in midfield. At least there were some heartening moments for Potter. As Palace failed to build on their promising start, Chelsea started to exert themselves. There was applause for Badiashile when he outmuscled Wilfried Zaha and constant encouragement for the energetic Hall. In midfield, Conor Gallagher kept driving forward, flinging in a cross that Hall almost converted. Creative flashes also came from Hakim Ziyech, who tested Vicente Guaita and crossed for Havertz to head over. But this was an experimental Chelsea team. There was a first start for the 19-year-old midfielder, Carney Chukwuemeka, and he tried his best. However, with Mason Mount still grasping for confidence and invention lacking in the absence of the suspended João Félix, the half ended goalless. At least a glimpse of Mudryk at half-time drew a cheer. Chelsea had to find more composure, especially as Palace had been forced into a change in central defence, Joachim Andersen limping off for James Tomkins. Yet there was no urgency. Palace went closest at the start of the second half, Arrizabalaga denying Zaha. Frustration grew. The crowd bellowed Vialli’s name on the hour and Potter responded, tweaking his attack with the introduction of Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang for Chukwuemeka. It was a good decision. Palace retreated and Chelsea pressed. After 65 minutes, Gallagher worked a short corner to Ziyech. The Moroccan’s cross was inviting and nobody could doubt Havertz’s desire when he powered his header past Guaita. Palace, who feel a little directionless, could not respond. They have not beaten a top-10 side this season and, although Arrizabalaga tipped Cheick Doucouré's late volley over, an equaliser rarely looked likely. Chelsea’s extra quality would make the difference. – Guardian