The death toll from a plane crash in Nepal has risen to 68, officials said. There were 72 people on the twin-engined ATR 72 aircraft operated by Nepal’s Yeti Airlines – including two infants, four crew members and 10 foreign nationals – said airline spokesman Sudarshan Bartaula. There were five Indians, four Russians, one Irish, two South Korean, one Australian, one French and one Argentinian national onboard. In a statement, the Department of Foreign Affairs said it was aware of reports of the involvement of an Irish citizen and is ready to provide consular assistance if requested. Hundreds of rescue workers are scoured the hillside crash site in Pokhara, but the search operation has stopped for the day due to darkness, an official said. The craft made contact with the airport from Seti Gorge at 10.50am local time, the aviation authority said in a statement. “Then it crashed.” At least three people have been taken to hospital but their condition is unclear, Mr Bartaula said. The flight was en route to Pokhara from capital Kathmandu and crashed “10 to 20 seconds before landing, he said, adding there was no distress call from the cockpit before the disaster, he said. Pokhara, in central Nepal, is a lakeside tourist mecca nestled below the Annapurna mountain range. “Half of the plane is on the hillside,” said Arun Tamu, a local resident, who told Reuters he reached the site minutes after the plane went down.” “The other half has fallen into the gorge of the Seti river.” Local television showed thick black smoke billowing from the crash site as rescue workers and crowds of people gathered around the wreckage of the aircraft. The plane was 15 years old, according to flight tracking website FlightRadar24. The ATR72 is a widely used twin engine turboprop plane manufactured by a joint venture of Airbus and Italy’s Leonardo. Yeti Airlines has a fleet of six ATR72-500 planes, according to its website. It was the deadliest crash in Nepal since 1992, the Aviation Safety Network database showed, when a Pakistan International Airlines Airbus A300 crashed into a hillside on approach to Kathmandu. At least 309 people have died since 2000 in plane or helicopter crashes in Nepal – home to eight of the world’s 14 highest mountains, including Everest – where the weather can change suddenly and make for hazardous conditions. The European Union has banned Nepali airlines from its airspace since 2013, citing safety concerns. – Reuters