The Department of Agriculture is investigating a large salmonella outbreak on eight poultry farms around the country. Because of the risk to human health from the bacteria, restrictions have been applied in the vicinity of the farms, most of which are in Co Cavan. As a consequence, the Food Safety Authority of Ireland (FSAI) has been called in to work with the department in an effort to curb the outbreak and find its original source. It is understood some of the affected poultry have been culled. The FSAI has confirmed that incidences of salmonella infection in broiler flocks were linked to a food recall it issued last week when some poultry products were removed from supermarket shelves. The department said it was working closely with the FSAI and the National Reference Laboratory for Salmonella to determine how the outbreak caused by salmonella typhimurium arose in a number of different areas at the same time. “To date, there are no human cases of illness linked to this investigation into the broiler flocks. This on-farm incident has arisen following the food recall of Western Brand undertaken last week,” the FSAI said in a statement. The authority has been notified by the department that affected flocks “will be culled and will not enter the food chain”. It is understood the salmonella was detected in a processing facility, which prompted a check back to supplier farms. Irish Farmers’ Association (IFA) poultry chairman Nigel Sweetnam said the cases of salmonella in a small number of farms was devastating for the flock owners concerned. The affected flocks were restricted and there was no threat to human health, he added. The authorities were working to deal with the situation as quickly and effectively as possible, he said. “In the meantime, I would ask everybody to review their biosecurity measures and to be extra vigilant.” On January 24th, Western Brand recalled expired batches of raw chicken products due to the detection of salmonella typhimurium. These products were sold as fresh and were past their use-by date, but the labels stated they were suitable for home freezing. It placed recall notices at point-of-sale and consumers were advised not to eat the affected batches should they have them in their freezers. The products had been supplied to Aldi, Lidl, Tesco, Dunnes Stores and Glenmore (BWG), and included chicken fillets, chicken legs, chicken wings, boned chicken breasts, whole chickens and products with stuffing. People infected with salmonella typically develop symptoms between 12 and 36 hours after infection, but this can range up to three days. The most common symptom is diarrhoea, which can sometimes be bloody. Other symptoms may include fever, headache and abdominal cramps. The illness usually lasts four to seven days. Diarrhoea can occasionally be severe enough to require hospital admission. Older people; infants, and those with impaired immune systems are more likely to have a severe illness. [ Salmonella cases in 2017 reach highest number in almost 10 years ]