Social media companies should require users to disclose their real identities as part of an effort to clamp down on online abuse, the Minister for Social Protection has said. Speaking on Sunday, Heather Humphreys agreed with a suggestion made by female politicians who spoke to The Irish Times last week that companies should have a requirement for a validated identity associated with accounts. She told Newstalk’s On The Record programme: “I believe we shouldn’t have to accept comments from people [when] we don’t know who they are” “Some of them don’t even have names, they’re anonymous people and I think that there should be a requirement if you’re going to put online media or put online comments in that domain, you should be accountable for what you say.” A range of politicians spoke to The Irish Times last week regarding online abuse, with the level of commentary directed at female members of the Oireachtas a particular problem – leading some to question whether they would continue in public life. “It shouldn’t be happening,” Ms Humphreys told the programme. “We should try and stop it, and we should try and deal with the perpetrators. There’s not that many of them, but it’s very upsetting for people. Some have had to go to court over it, it’s not acceptable and I feel we just need to deal with it.” [ ‘He started screaming and roaring and coming up into my face’: Women politicians reveal abuse plaguing Irish politics ] Ms Humphreys, who is the longest-serving female member of the current Cabinet, emphasised the importance of female participation in politics: “It’s important we come forward, our voices are heard and we bring a different perspective sometimes to problems that are presented. It’s important that we have that balance of both men and women in terms of decision-making.” The Cavan-Monaghan TD also indicated there was no immediate plans to offer more cost-of-living supports to voters, notwithstanding the ongoing crisis in the area – pointing instead to budget-day decisions that are only coming into effect now. “From my perspective as Minister for Social Protection, I introduced the largest increase in social welfare rates in a decade – they all kicked in, the €12 increase from the 1st of January this year. There’s going to be a major expansion of the fuel-allowance scheme, bringing about 80,000 more people into that scheme,” she said. “Minister O’Gorman has reduced childcare fees, and we introduced a €1 billion tax package and that will support hundreds of thousands of workers, and there’s still two more €200 energy credits to come,” she added. “I think it’s only just a few weeks since these measures have kicked in. The tax relief will kick in shortly, and the two more €200 energy credits,” the Minister said. “We will keep everything under review, but there are no plans at the minute to do anything.” Asked about the controversy over her colleague Damien English’s decision to resign as a Minister of State after it emerged he put incorrect information in a planning application, she said he was a “great colleague”. “He overlooked 14 years ago an issue that he didn’t complete correctly. He put his hands up when it was brought to his attention, and he resigned [his position], he paid a very high price.” Asked if he could continue as a TD for Meath West or whether the local authority could pursue him over the issue, she said: “I don’t know if it’s part of the legislation, of the planning process. I’m not sure. If that needs to be pursued, that will be a matter for Meath County Council.” Mr English also made several Dáil contributions on the role of vulture funds without disclosing two of his loans had been bought by such a fund, The Ditch website reported last week. She defended her party colleague, saying: “The fact that he had two of his mortgages taken over by a vulture fund means he could have certainly an understanding with other people at the time. As we know there were a lot of mortgages, a lot of concerns out there among the public regarding what would happen with their mortgages and such things. “Politicians, we have to live normal lives as well, to be fair. I do know that there is a review of the ethics in public office legislation at the minute and if it’s found that we have to make changes there well we will make changes,” she said. Asked about the affair and other recent controversies including one that led to the resignation of Fianna Fáil’s Robert Troy, she said that updating the register of members interests on an ongoing basis rather than annually was “something we need to look at”.