Paschal Donohoe is set to face a Dáil question and answer session next week after he told the House he would make a further statement regarding election expenses. The Dáil business committee on Thursday agreed that he will give a ten minute statement after Taoiseach’s Questions next Tuesday. There will be six minutes allotted to each opposition group and party with questions and answers taken immediately at each slot. The opposition strongly criticised Wednesday’s appearance by Mr Donohoe, arguing he did not answer questions put to him following his statement on the controversy. The Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform had told the Dáil on Thursday morning morning that he plans to make another statement at the “earliest possible opportunity” but was not in a position to do so on Thursday. “I do plan to make a further statement in relation to issues involving the 2016 general election campaign and matters that were put to me last night,” he said. Sinn Féin deputy leader Pearse Doherty said it was completely and utterly unacceptable that the Minister would not come before the Dáil until next week. The Dáil is not due to sit again until Tuesday. Speaking during Leaders’ Questions, Mr Doherty said the Minister was “embroiled in controversy” and was refusing to answer questions in the Dáil. The Donegal TD said what happened in the chamber on Wednesday night, when the Minister made a statement, was “farcical and completely unacceptable” and that none of the questions put to him were answered. Mr Doherty said what was needed was what other Ministers had undertaken previously: questions and answers before the Dáil “in real time”. Mr Doherty asked Tánaiste Micheál Martin did businessman Michael Stone pay for posters to be erected for the Dublin Central TD during the 2020 general election campaign. He said Sinn Féin were demanding a questions-and-answers session with the Minister, adding: “We demand the Minister comes clean.” Mr Martin said Mr Donohoe was a very competent, dedicated and honourable Minister and had the country’s interests at heart in the discharge of his duties as a Minister. Mr Martin said it was essential members of the House adhere to rules and regulations around political donations and electoral spending. The Tánaiste said Mr Donohoe had come before the Dáil already and would do so again. He also said the Minister spoke with him on Sunday and outlined what had transpired and apologised for the omission and the mistake he made. Mr Donohoe disclosed to the Dáil on Wednesday that businessman Michael Stone made two other donations worth €1,716 to Fine Gael in addition to the postering services he donated during the 2016 general election campaign. The Minister said that in 2020 and 2021 Mr Stone, the founder of engineering company Designer Group, purchased superdraw tickets for the Fine Gael party, which he sold to him. Mr Stone bought five tickets worth €334 in 2020 and 22 tickets worth €1,382 in 2021. In a personal statement to the Dáil relating to his failure to include a donation of services worth €1,057 by Mr Stone during the 2016 campaign, Mr Donohoe apologised for the omission and said he was “very sorry that it has happened”. A total of €917 was donated by way of services by workers erecting the posters and a further €140 for the use of a van. Mr Donohoe also said that as the Standards in Public Office Commission (Sipo) was now examining the donation, he has recused himself from any policy area involving electoral or ethical policy. He said Minister for Finance Michael McGrath would now assume responsibility for those areas. The latest development has taken Government backbenchers by surprise, and caused concern. One Fianna Fáil TD said they believed a full Sipo investigation was now unavoidable, and that the situation was “very uncomfortable” for Mr Donohoe The TD added that if anything emerged that was at odds with Mr Donohoe’s Dáil statement on Wednesday, it could cause major difficulties for the Minister. “Fianna Fáil ministers will back him, but if he has misled the Dáil he could be in trouble,” the TD said. Another said the situation was “getting messy”, while a third cautioned that the situation could “spin out of control”.