Ballyhale Shamrocks (Kilkenny) 1-22 Dunloy Cúchullains (Antrim) 1-15 When you have a team of doyens like Ballyhale within striking distance, 10 minutes to go in an All-Ireland final, execution is paramount. It seemed it was the chance for Dunloy to assume order, only to find the Kilkenny champions in no such mood. So without being allowed or indeed needing to be at their chilling best, Ballyhale are again masters of club hurling, winning what is the third of the last four AIB All-Ireland tiles. Covid-19 took care of the 2021 title. On a misty afternoon at Croke Park, the surface resembling a well-worn Subbuteo mat, Ballyhale entered that homestretch unquestionably aware of last year’s final experience, when they were caught at the death by Ballygunner. This time there would be no reservation, Ballyhale out-scoring Dunloy eight points to two from there, scores coming from all over the field, including four in injury time. While certainly not undeserving, that seven-point margin did flatter, several of Dunloy’s closing attacks either falling short or breaking down early, fatigue setting in too, manager Gregory O’Kane afterwards conceding as much. Getting back to an All-Ireland final the year after losing one is a unique achievement in itself, and required the disposing of Ballygunner in the semi-final, this win extending Ballyhale’s record tally of All-Ireland titles to nine, five more than then next best, Birr and Portumna. In cold contrast it’s the fifth final loss for the Antrim club, the first in 1995, the last in 2004. Man-of-the-match Eoin Cody finished with 1-5, all from play, and they closed out the game with the complete team effort – 11 different scorers in all including replacement Brian Cody, only just back from a lengthy spell of injury. For full back Joey Holden it was particular satisfying, the two-time All-Ireland winner with Kilkenny winning his fifth club title with Ballyhale, his presence on this run only decided after he returned home from his travels following the death of his father. He flies out for Mexico later on Monday. It’s an incredible sixth All-Ireland club title for TJ Reid, who finished the afternoon with 0-7, his placed ball accuracy troubled at times by that rough and rowdy surface. Dunloy certainly met the challenge face on, with a bit of swagger too. Ballyhale, already fitful throughout this campaign, looking a little lethargic in the opening quarter. Adrian Mullen didn’t start because a hamstring injury, an obvious loss for the Ballyhale attack, Joey Cuddihy getting them off their mark, scoring after a neat pass from Reid. The Antrim men were unruffled, one of their opening attacks on goal, after two minutes, deftly finished into the net by Ronan Molloy, after being set up by Conal Cunning. Ballyhale got back level after five minutes with a cool Reid point from play, his 65m free then pushing them briefly ahead. After Ryan Elliott saved a close-range goal chance from Cody, Dunloy pushed on, an inspiring point from captain Paul Shiels, matched by a darting run and point from corner back Oran Quinn, and they were back in front just before the quarter-hour mark. Then Cody pounced for his goal, set up by Colin Fennelly, helped by a slight misunderstanding in the Dunloy defence, Cody himself unsure if the move was being called back for a free; the goal stood. Played out in calm hurling conditions for January, again Dunloy clawed the deficit back, Nicky McKeague bringing it to 1-4 apiece, Ballyhale clear now they had a proper game on their hands. Three points without reply, two from Cody and another from Evan Shefflin gave them a little breathing space. Elliott pulled off another brilliant save from Cody, who soon put Ballyhale four up, 1-9 to 1-5, as the break approached: then Sean Elliott, plus Cunning’s third free from three, brought it back to two at the turnaround. Game still on. It stayed that close for the first 20 minutes of the second half, Cunning still cool and consistent with his free-taking, Ronan Molloy’s super effort on 50 minutes bringing it back to that one-point game, 1-14 to 1-13. Dunloy’s young full back Ryan McGarry did a fine marking job on Colin Fennelly, but their bigger shorting coming was at the other end. While Cunning was consistent in his free-taking, Keelan Molloy, who had a sensational semi-final, was kept to a single point from play. Even while hitting only three balls wide, several more fell short of their intended target, or indeed target man, and that was ultimately Dunloy’s undoing. Once Ballyhale got properly on top, and the game entered those last 10 minutes, it was they that had more in reserve. Cody again, then captain Ronan Corcoran, replacement Brian Cody, and Darragh Corcoran all scoring from play and with great confidence to ensure the Kilkenny champions won with that room to spare. Execution in the end proved paramount. BALLYHALE SHAMROCKS: D Mason; K Corcoran (0-1), J Holden, B Butler; E Shefflin (0-1), R Reid, D Corcoran (0-1); R Corcoran, capt, (0-1), P Mullen (0-1);, N Shortall, TJ Reid (0-7 four 65s, two frees), E Cody (1-5), E Kenneally (0-1), C Fennelly (0-2), J Cuddihy (0-1). Subs: B Cody (0-1)for Shortall (50 mins), D Mullen for K Corcoran (59 mins). DUNLOY CUCHULLAINS: R Elliott; P Duffin, R McGarry, O Quinn (0-1); C Kinsella, K Molloy, E Smyth (0-1); P Shiels, capt (0-2), E McFerran; R Molloy (1-1), N McKeague (0-1), N Elliott, K Molloy (0-1), C Gunning (0-7, all frees), S Elliott (0-1). Subs: D Smith for McKeague (45 mins), C McMahon for N Elliott (54 mins). Referee: Johnny Murphy (Limerick).