Roy Barrett is to step down as chairman of the Football Association of Ireland (FAI). Barrett took over the position as independent chairman in January 2020 and was tasked with stabilising an association with financial difficulties over the past three years. He will continue his role until a suitable replacement is found. Barrett’s reasoning for leaving the role is related to the December 2023 deadline to establish 40 per cent female representation among the 12-strong board of directors, in order to avoid a 50 per cent cut in Government funding. The board includes two women, Liz Joyce and Catherine Guy and a third, Niamh O’Mahony, was elected and is due to be ratified as a board member on January 21st. In a statement to the General Assembly, Barrett said: “My intention to step down from my position provides a clear opportunity for the Board, to ensure that at least 40 per cent of the directors are female by the end of 2023, as required by the Constitution, and the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Government. This is something that I feel very strongly about, and I am convinced that this is in the best long-term interest of the FAI and the game of football in Ireland. “I am pleased with the progress that the organisation has made over the period. We now have much greater financial stability, we have a new CEO and management team which I am increasingly impressed with and there is a clear direction for our sport in Ireland,” he said. “Similarly, relationships with the key stakeholders of the FAI have been repaired and there is a lot of support there for the game and its development. This is a good point for me to step aside and let others continue on with the journey. I will continue to fulfil my role and responsibilities with the same energy and enthusiasm until a replacement is found.” Barrett was previously a managing director of Goodbody Stockbrokers, where he worked for 25 years. Former minister for sport Shane Ross had made the appointment of independent directors a key part of the reform agenda for the FAI. Barrett was known to support Republic of Ireland manager Stephen Kenny and publicly backed Kenny after the World Cup defeat to Luxembourg in 2021. Independent director Gary Twohig will also step down and will now not be seeking ratification as a Director of the FAI at the resumed AGM on January 21st. President of the FAI Gerry McAnaney said: “I personally would like to sincerely thank Roy for all his work in helping to stabilise the Association after a difficult period. I look forward to continuing our positive working relationship over the coming months as we seek a successor.” FAI CEO Jonathan Hill said: “I would like to thank Roy and Gary for their contribution to the FAI throughout a transformational time for the association.” The FAI will conduct an executive search for the recruitment of independent directors to replace Barrett and Twohig on the board.