Christmas travel boosted Ryanair’s profit to €211 million in the three months ended December 31st. The airline said on Monday that it flew 38.4 million passengers in the period, the third quarter of its financial year, 24 per cent more than in 2021. Ryanair earned €211 million profit after tax over the three months, more than twice the €88 million it reported for the same quarter in 2019, before Covid-19 hit air travel. It was a record Q3 profit for the airline. Strong demand over Christmas, New Year and the October mid-term boosted its performance, it said. Michael O’Leary, confirmed that Ryanair was on track to earn profit between €1.325 billion and €1.425 billion in the financial year, which ends on March 31st. “This guidance remains heavily dependent upon avoiding adverse events in quarter four, such as Covid and/or the war in Ukraine,” he said in a statement. Neil Sorahan, chief financial officer, said Ryanair was “very pleased” with bookings over the past three weeks. “They are robust right up into Easter,” he noted, adding that fares were up on last year also. Ryanair is due to receive 51 new jets from Boeing by the summer. Commenting on reports of delayed deliveries from the US manufacturer across the industry, Mr Sorahan predicted that total deliveries by the peak holiday season could be four or five fewer. He added that Ryanair “babysat” Boeing to monitor deliveries and pointed out that the US manufacturer prioritised the airline as it was a big customer. Mr Sorahan said Ryanair was happy that Europe’s airports were better positioned to manage demand this summer and avoid the chaos that marred last year for many holidaymakers. “But we’re unhappy with what we’re seeing at the air traffic control side,” he added, highlighting France and Germany, and noting that the Ukraine conflict continued to limit air space in eastern Europe. Air traffic control strikes in France, through whose skies large numbers of European flights pass, delayed or cancelled flights last year. Ryanair and other airlines continue to lobby the EU to reform air traffic control.