Carlow Manager: Niall Carew 2022: 7th in Division Four and lost Leinster 1st round to Louth; Tailteann Cup, lost quarter-final to Westmeath Opening fixture: v Wicklow (home) Lifted spirits when beating Tipp in last summer’s Tailteann Cup but mixed fortunes in the O’Byrne Cup before withdrawing from final match with Laois. Need to improve league performances. Laois Manager: Billy Sheehan 2022: Relegated Division Three and lost Leinster 1st round to Wicklow; Tailteann Cup, lost 1st round to Westmeath Opening fixture: v Sligo (away) Always a sense of urgency for Laois to get out of the basement and they will be without the ageless Ross Munnelly who has retired. Consistency required, as lack of it cost relegation last year. London Manager: Michael Maher 2022: 5th in Division Four, lost Connacht quarter-final to Leitrim; Tailteann Cup, lost 1st round to Sligo Opening fixture: v Wexford (away) Manager Michael Maher had an encouraging 2022 with a great start to the season. This year has a promising championship draw to aim at but Maher is on record that league form will determine prospects. Leitrim Manager: Andy Moran 2022: 4th, Division Four, lost Connacht semi-final to Galway; Tailteann Cup, lost quarter-final to Sligo Opening fixture: v Waterford (home) After an energising debut season, Andy Moran comes to terms with the departure of captain David Bruen, who’s gone to Australia, as he sizes up a potentially big year. Sligo Manager: Tony McEntee 2022: 3rd, Division Four and lost Connacht semi-final to Roscommon Opening fixture: v Laois (home) Third last year and favourites for promotion this season, Sligo had a good run in the Tailteann Cup last summer and will look to deliver, helped by the county’s under-20 success last year. Waterford Manager: Ephie Fitzgerald 2022: 8th, Division Four and lost Munster quarter-final to Tipperary; Tailteann Cup, lost preliminary round to Wicklow Opening fixture: v Leitrim (away) Ephie Fitzgerald is all in, having taken on the under-20s as well. Plenty of upside as bottom team in the league despite some competitive displays. Wexford Manager: John Hegarty 2022: 6th, Division Four and lost Leinster quarter-final to Dublin; Tailteann Cup, lost preliminary round to Offaly Opening fixture: v London (home) Wexford have stagnated having fallen into Division Four and former player John Hegarty is the latest to try his hand. O’Byrne Cup defeats by Kildare and Westmeath show scale of the challenge. Wicklow Manager: Oisín McConville 2022: Relegated Division Three and lost Leinster quarter-final to Meath; Tailteann Cup, lost first round to Offaly Opening fixture: v Carlow (away) Oisín McConville’s appointment and the big sponsorship deal announced in October have the county buoyant. Last year saw a good championship win but relegation in the league. Time to bounce.