Greencore will “consider” paying a dividend at its half-year stage, chairman designate Leslie Van de Walle told the sandwich and convenience food maker’s shareholders on Thursday. The group warned of a “difficult” market ahead of its annual general meeting in Dublin and said it expects results to be at the lower end of current market expectations in 2023. Shareholders at the meeting criticised Greencore’s failure to pay dividends with some arguing that its current stock buy back programme was damaging the group’s value. Mr Van de Walle acknowledged that the company should have a dividend policy. “And now that the business is more stable it’s something that the board will consider but it will not be until the half year that we make a decision,” he said. However, he disputed that share buy backs had prompted a 25 per cent fall in its stock price since 2019. “The reason the shares are down is that first our results and profits are 25 per cent lower than they used to be and second markets are very volatile,” he said. Emma Hynes, chief financial officer, noted that some shareholders agreed that the buy back was the right approach at this point in time. Shareholder Neil Duggan said Greencore’s annual report indicated that the board did not favour paying dividends. He proposed that the board consider paying a 2 pence sterling a-share at the half-year stage. “It’s a pittance but we’re getting nothing at this stage,” Mr Duggan added. Mr Van de Walle agreed that the board would consider this, but stressed that this did not mean it would pay it. Greencore will reach the halfway mark in its financial year on March 31st and will report interim results at the end of May. In a statement the group said revenues rose 19 per cent in its first quarter, but growth was driven by rising prices rather than volumes. The group, which is focused on the UK market, said revenue for the 13 weeks to December 30th 2022 was £463 million (€525 million). Volumes were “modestly” behind year on year, Greencore said. In the “food to go” category, revenue rose 14.5 per cent to £291.1 million on lower volumes, as the railway strikes in the quarter hit the demand for sushis and salads. Greencore also recorded lower volumes in the distribution of third-party products, which were down 10 per cent year on year. Its other convenience sector saw reported revenue up almost 28 per cent to £171.9 million with strong volumes from its ready meals business. Lower volumes and a lag in recovery of inflation over the final months of 2022 also led to profit conversion that was behind management expectations, with the group pledging to immediately implement further measures to tackle this, focusing on contract margin enhancement and delivery of its operational excellence programme. Chief executive Dalton Philips said the market was difficult and volatile, with the business getting off to a slower start to the year than envisaged. However, the new chief executive, who stepped into the role four months ago, said he remained “highly enthusiastic” about the group’s longer-term future. “We are doubling down on our initiatives on inflation recovery, and in parallel, driving harder and faster to get our cost base to the right level,” he said. “Strategically we are well positioned for the future growth given our customer base, the categories in which we operate, our operational capabilities and critically the people behind all of this. However, the immediate focus is to tackle the shorter-term self-help actions which set the foundations for margin recovery.”