Well now, here it is at last. Our first St Brigid’s Day public holiday. Brigid, Brigit, Bridget, Bríd, Bridie: whatever we call her, she was some woman, and her day, Lá Fhéile Bríde, or Imbolc, on February 1st has long heralded renewal and the traditional start of spring in Ireland. Brigid is one of our three patron saints, along with the Patrick and Colmcille. A powerful woman, it’s taken centuries to create a public holiday in her honour. But finally, to break the bleakness of winter, we have Brigid’s Day, a public holiday on February 6th (as the 1st falls on a Wednesday this year). From Louth and based in Kildare, St Brigid was headstrong and holy, accomplished and multitalented. Born around AD 450, she had a long, productive and eventful life. She set up monasteries around Ireland, of which Kildare was one of the largest, with a hospital, scriptorium and farm. As Abbess of Kildare she managed monastery farms and thousands of nuns. She was ordained bishop. She was a master brewer of ale. The early Christian saint is seen as an early feminist, and has long been inspirational. “She held more power in the Catholic church than any woman before or since”, says Una O’Hagan, who co-wrote The Book of St Brigid with her late husband Colm Keane. It paints a picture of a woman combining humanity and humility with great power. The decision to make a public holiday for Brigid follows a three-year campaign by Herstory, founded by Melanie Lynch in 2016 to tell the stories of modern, historic and mythic women. Its annual Herstory Light Show has illuminated landmarks and sacred sites honouring women on Brigid’s Day since 2017. Lynch lauds the Ireland’s first public holiday “named in honour of a woman: Brigid, our matron St and Celtic Goddess. Herstory is every woman’s story, and we hope this landmark moment for Mná na hÉireann will inspire our diaspora worldwide and other countries to join Ireland in celebrating women and girls as we work towards equality for all. On the first day of spring, may we come together in the spirit of the Celtic tradition to plant new seeds for our shared future, and a healthy Mother Earth.” From Wednesday and into the long weekend, plenty of events are lined up, here and around the world, from the serious to the anarchic; check locally to see what’s on, and here are just some of them. Finally out of the shadows of Patrick and his showy snake-banishing, let’s hear it for Brigid! Long-time Brigid champions Herstory sparks Brigid’s Day with light shows in Galway, Roscommon and Kildare, illuminating landmarks honouring Brigid and mná na hÉireann. Herstory invited artists to create lluminations inspired by Brigid, goddess and saint, and the modern women embodying her qualities and passions as environmentalist, feminist, Pride icon, healer, pioneer, human rights activist, goddess of the arts, alchemist and wisdom weaver. The light show was all over Galway city last night and tonight, Saturday, the light show is at National Famine Museum, Strokestown House, Roscommon from 5.30pm as part of its Brigid’s Awakening Festival. On St Brigid’s Eve, January 31st the light show is in Brigid’s home territory, Kildare: at the Potato Market Naas 5.30-10pm, with firedancers (7.30-8.30pm); Wonderful Barn, Leixlip 5.30-6.30pm, with firedancers; Maynooth Castle 7.30-8.30pm, and Athy Library 10-11.30pm. Herstory’s new Peace Heroines exhibition highlights women’s pivotal role in the Northern peace process in the run-up to the Good Friday Agreement’s 25th anniversary this April. It’s at London’s Irish Embassy on February 1st, then Ambassador Geraldine Nason Byrne launches it at the US Congress on February 8th, before moving to UN HQ in New York March 27th-April 7th. The exhibition is also now at the Derry Tower Museum, until March 24th. herstory.ie A year of events commemorating St Brigid’s life and legacy, before the 1,500th anniversary of her death next year. Led by Kildare County Council with a committee of experts, it aims for a meaningful legacy for a diverse contemporary audience, engaging with values Brigid championed, including faith and spirituality, biodiversity and sustainability, arts and culture, social justice, peace, hospitality and education. Events around Brigid’s Day include a Fire & Light Walk from Kildare Town Square (February 4th, 6pm); lit-up sites and buildings across Kildare and beyond and others hosting light illustrations (January 31st, February 1st); Eimear Quinn concert, February 5th at St Brigid’s Cathedral in Kildare town; Féile Bríde Art Exhibition of The Book of Kildare project by artist and calligrapher Josephine Hardiman (Kildare Library until end of February); Co Kildare libraries host craft workshops, poetry readings, children’s storytimes; plus a school lesson plan, school tree planting and a Brigid’s Day GAA Blitz for sixth class. brigid1500.ie Citywide activities from Dublin City Council, many of them free, from February 1st to Monday 6th. Highlights include: authors Elaine Farrell and Leanne McCormick discussing the dark side of life as an Irish woman emigrant and their book Bad Bridget: Crime, Mayhem and the Lives of Irish Emigrant Women. Women Walk the City, a series of walking tours based on the stories and experiences of Dublin women past and present, including forager-herbalist Feebee Foran, artist-illustrator Eva Kelly, and teacher-psychotherapist Dr Karen Ward; illustration and light projection created by Irish illustrator Bronagh Lee at Barnardo’s Square after dark, including aerial performance on February 5th inspired by Lee’s artwork with music by composer Ellen King (aka ELLL); Imbolc Village (Meeting House Square, Temple Bar, February 5th, 12-4pm), celebrating the spirit of Celtic goddess Brigid with activities for all ages, including body-painting workshop, blacksmithing, a wise women’s weaving circle, and Imbolc Tarot reading; Stories of Valour and Home, the work of 10 women artists and poetry exploring themes of shelter, safety, and support, and the idea of knowing what is worth defending, on Living Canvas’s large outdoor screen at Wilton Park (February 1st-6th); craft workshops and meetups including Create Your Own Boob Pots (clay-making) or the Dublin Sewcial Club “stitch and bitch”. dublin.ie/brigid Brigid’s Awakening Festival, Strokestown Park, Co Roscommon (January 28th-February 5th). Including a Herstory Salon, shadow puppetry, ceremony at the illuminated Brigid’s Cross on Tarmonbarry Bridge, performance of Briget’s Cloak, talks, an exhibition, and Candlelit Tales. strokestownpark.ie Brigid’s Garden, Roscahill, Co Galway. The striking Celtic garden 20 minutes north of Galway city hosts a fireside exploration and stories of Brigid, songs and guided meditation (remote online January 29th; in-person February 6th) plus a free Brigid’s Cross or Brídeog workshops on Monday 6th. brigidsgarden.ie Herself, Gort courthouse, Co Galway (dusk, February 4th). A large-scale public projection of filmed portraits of individual women, layered with visuals representing their “Bigid” qualities. Artists Shona MacGillivray and Jill Beardsworth collaborate with local community groups. creativeireland.gov.ie Wild Women, (Dún Laoghaire Lexicon, January 31st, 6pm). Discussion about the unconventional and unruly women who followed in Brigid’s footsteps and broke the mould, chaired by Flor MacCarthy with Ailbhe Smyth, Senator Eileen Flynn, Sarah Webb, Justine McCarthy, Martina Devlin and Lise-Ann McLaughlin. libraries.dlrcoco.ie Brigid of Ireland, Icon for Today: Woman Spirit Ireland and TCD Centre for Gender and Women’s Studies seminar digging into Brigid’s living traditions; historical Brigid and her successors; her depictions in artwork, ancient and modern, along with the artefacts used in Imbolc rituals. Plus poetry, music, Brigid crosses and Brídógs. (Ed Burke Theatre, Trinity College Dublin, January 28th). eventbrite.ie Brigid’s Flamin’ – The Wild Geeze & guests: Evening cabaret with comedy duo Bridget Larkin and burlesque chanteuse Miss Lavelle hosting music, comedy and burlesque from their favourite Brigid-enriched performers. The Fumbally, Dublin 8, February 5th. thefumbally.ie St Brigid Anniversary Art Project: display of mixed media art from Creative Ireland project, artist Shauna Swords working with students from St Brigid’s Special School in Dundalk. creativeireland.gov.ie Weaving a Crosóg Bride (St Brigid’s Cross) with weaver Brendan Farren, Eden Place Arts Centre, Derry, January 31st, 12pm. Irish embassies and consulates are leading an impressive range of celebrations around the world. The London embassy was ahead of the curve with Brigid, hosting events since 2018, and this year on February 1st celebrates with discussions on women and peace; literature; diversity and inclusion; poetry and music. It’s part of a wider St Brigid’s Festival in Britain in the Consulate network, the Irish Cultural Centre Hammersmith, London Irish Centre, and Irish Film London. Berlin’s Brigidsfest: The Authors are Present is a three-day festival of woman creativity in written and spoken word. Plus Brussels has networking, Budapest exhibits contemporary art, Helsinki explores Women Peace and Security, and Madrid has theatre and Irish dancing. Herstory’s Peace Heroines exhibition is at the US Congress, Women of Extraordinary Ability at the Irish Consulate New York highlights women breaking gendered stereotypes, Atlanta marks Women in Creativity and Cultural Industry, and Vancouver has a Brigid festival. Lá Fhéile Bríde is celebrated across four States and Territories and seven cities in Australia. Wellington embassy’s Agents of Change reflects on the legacy, influence and role of women and girls. More details of St Brigid’s Day events across the globeinternationally on Ireland.ie.