The death toll from a Russian missile strike on an apartment building in the Ukrainian city of Dnipro climbed to 21 on Sunday, as rescue workers raced to dig through a huge pile of debris in search of survivors. At least 35 people were still missing and 73 were injured, Mykola Lukashuk, head of the regional council, wrote on the Telegram messaging app. “Burn in hell, Russian murderers,” he wrote. The building in Dnipro, a city in east-central Ukraine, was partly destroyed during a series of attacks on Saturday, Russia’s largest wave of strikes in two weeks. There was no immediate comment from Moscow about the attacks. The strikes hit critical infrastructure in Kyiv and other places, restricting power supply at the height of winter for the capital and large swaths of the country for the coming days, officials warned. The strikes – Russia’s largest wave of attacks on Ukraine in two weeks – came as the country was observing the traditional New Year. In Russia, President Vladimir Putin said the so-called special military operation was showing a positive trend and that he hoped Russian soldiers would deliver further gains after claiming control of the salt-mining town Soledar. “The dynamic is positive,” Mr Putin told Rossiya 1 state television. “Everything is developing within the framework of the plan of the Ministry of Defense and the General Staff.” “And I hope that our fighters will please us even more with the results of their combat,” he said. Russia said on Friday that its forces had taken control of Soledar in eastern Ukraine, in what would be a rare success for Moscow after months of battlefield reverses. As ground fighting continued in Ukraine’s east, Britain followed France and Poland with promises of further weapons, saying it would send 14 of its Challenger 2 main battle tanks and artillery support. The moves add pressure on Germany to follow suit as Kyiv’s continues to plea for advanced military equipment. Elsewhere, Russia cancelled at the last minute on Saturday a scheduled exchange of prisoners of war, the Ukrainian body dealing with prisoners said. Russia and Ukraine have conducted a number of prisoner swaps – most recently on January 8th – amounting to hundreds of captives each in the course of the war, which is now in its 11th month. – Reuters