Ireland, as host nation, will have dual representation for the final rounds of the Camrose Trophy home international open championship at City North hotel, Gormanstown from Friday to Sunday next. Mark Moran, John Carroll, Tom Hanlon, Conor Boland, Adam Mesbur, Tommy Garvey and non-playing captain Gráinne Barton will line out for Ireland while Martin Brady, David Dunne, Paul Delaney, Tomás Roche, Peter Pigot, Karel De Raeymaeker with NPC Derek O’Gorman will carry the banner of the Contract Bridge Association of Ireland (CBAI). The CBAI side is the better placed after the first weekend of matches, two points behind Wales but 23 points behind the leaders England which, despite fielding a completely new team will start warm favourites to win their fifth consecutive Camrose trophy. Northern Ireland will be represented by Ian Lindsay, Ian Hamilton, David and Diane Greenwood, Michael Coffey and Fergal O’Shea with NPC Michael McFaul. Munster players dominated the competitions at Tralee international congress at the weekend. Kay Cussen and Denis Sheehan won the main pairs event from Tom McCarthy, Joe Higgins with Tom Hardiman, John Reen third. Session winners: Marian Baker, Nora O’Driscoll; Justin and Justin jnr Spratt. Gala pairs: 1. John and Kelan O’Connor; 2. Reen, Eugene Corcoran; 3. Trevor Phelan, Tina Nolan. Diane and David Greenwood won the Belfast Swiss pairs tournament on Sunday. Ian Lindsay, Robin Burns were second, Helen Hall, Michael McFaul third. Ireland’s representatives finished fifth in the Lederer trophy invitational tournament in London but well behind the English-Polish winning team of Jodi Edmonds, Joel Wooldridge, Michal Klukowski, Piotr Zatorski and Zach Grossack. Malahide congress will begin at the Grand Hotel on Friday evening with pairs competitions for all grades. The congress pairs championship, as well as separate events for area masters and intermediate players, will be contested on Saturday. Open and intermediate team tournaments will take place on Sunday. Single-session pairs competitions for intermediate and novice grades will be played on Saturday and Sunday. Entries, via the CBAI online system, to Peter Wilson 087-9377493 or to Mary Kelly-Rogers 087-2333562. Worldwide online tournaments for under-26 and under-16 players respectively will be played on the RealBridge website on Sunday March 12th. A pairs competition for the younger category will start at 9am Irish time while the older age group will play in a team tournament commencing at 6pm. Participation is free. Players must enter via a coach or captain at events@realbridge.online.