Super sub Sean Quigley snatched victory from the jaws of defeat for Fermanagh in a heart-stopping affair in Ederney. The veteran forward followed in a long delivery from Garvan Jones and punched the ball from the grasp of Down goalkeeper Niall Kane in the 74th minute. It looked like Conor Francis had secured victory for Down when he found the net after the ball came off the host’s crossbar in the 69th minute to leave Down leading by 3-10 to 1-14. And if luck played a slight role in their final goal, Fermanagh fully deserved victory. Wind-assisted Fermanagh had a bright start with Ronan McCaffrey opening the scoring after two minutes. The visitors hit back with a pointed free from the lively Liam Kerr. But Fermanagh were already in the ascendancy and Ryan Lyons and Aidan Breen increased the lead to 0-3 to 0-1 by the seventh minute. Down did hit back through a scything run that ended with marksman Pat Havern finishing with aplomb. It was then that Darragh McGurn weighed in with a superb point from distance as Down responded through Havern after an effort from Kerr was superbly saved by Erne keeper Liam McNally. Fermanagh were ruling midfield as Down replaced Niall Donnelly with Anthony Morgan. McGurn and Lyons turned up the heat in the run up to the break with some excellent scores. They were well worth their 0-10 to 0-4 half-time lead but gave away a soft goal after the break when keeper Sean McNally was dispossessed in no man’s land although he seemed to be fouled. A penalty ensued when a Down player was taken down in the square with midfielder Odhran Murdock converting the spot kick. This reduced the host’s lead to 0-11 to 1-5 and set the scene for a frenetic second half as both sides went for the jugular. Down corner back Pierce Laverty punched a goal for an increasingly rampant Down side before the excellent Ultan Kelm hit two superb points into the breeze and set up Conor McGee for a goal to put the home side ahead by 2-8 to 0-13 in the 58th minute. The pace quickened in those final frenetic moments that kept the large crowd on their toes. McGurn’s power caused the Down defence problems throughout and he and Kelm were the main threats up front. This was a valuable victory for Fermanagh as defeat would’ve left them in early relegation trouble. Down will not be happy about the concession of that final goal but are still on four points after three games. FERMANAGH: Sean McNally; Luke Flanagan, Lee Cullen, Cian McManus; Ronan McCaffrey (0-1), Jonathan Cassidy, Shane McGullion (0-1); Ryan Jones (0-1), Brandon Horan; Josh Largo Ellis, Ryan Lyons (0-2 frees), Ultan Kelm (0-2); Conor McShea (0-1), Darragh McGurn (0-5, one free) Aidan Breen (0-1). Subs: Conor McGee (1-0) for Aidan Breen (45 mins), Ciaran Corrigan for Conor McShea (57 mins), Sean Quigley (1-0) for Brandon Horan and Garvan Jones for Ryan Lyons (60 mins). DOWN: Niall Kane (0-1), Ryan Magill, Ryan McEvoy, Pierce Laverty (1-0); Conor Francis (1-0), Niall McParland, Shane Annett (0-1); Niall Donnelly, Odhran Murdock (1-0 pen); Ruairi McCormack, Owen McCabe, Liam Kerr (0-1 free); Ceilum Doherty, Pat Havern (0-5, two frees) Conor Poland. Subs: Shay Millar (0-1) for Owen McCabe (17 mins), Anthony Morgan for Niall Donnelly (24 mins), Conor McCrickard for Niall McParland and Andrew Gilmore (0-1) for Conor Poland (h-t) Patrick Brannigan for Shane Annett (55 mins). Referee: Conor Dourneen (Cavan) [ Antrim footballers overwhelm Tipperary for their first competitive win of 2023 ] In-form Cavan made it three wins from three as they eased to a comfortable home victory against a disappointing Longford to retain top spot in Division 3. By half-time, this one was as good as over as Cavan led by 1-9 to 0-5, having played, for the most part, against a swirling wind, and after the break, Mickey Graham’s men kicked on, with subs Paddy Lynch and Conor Madden landing 0-7 between them. The highlight of the first half was a brilliant goal by Cavan’s Oisin Brady, who later went off injured, as did the in-form Dara McVeety. There was a just a point between the sides after 17 minutes but Cavan completely dominated the second quarter as Longford appeared to run out of gas. Longford’s main attacking spark came from wing forward Joe Hagan, who scored two quality points from play and set Robbie Smyth up for a mark, but when he was dismissed on a harsh-looking second yellow card, Longford’s race was run. With newcomers Brandon Boylan, Johnny McCabe and David Brady all impressing, Cavan kicked on – and the loudest cheer of the day was reserved for sub Killian Brady, who came on for his 100th appearance. Cavan now move clear at the top of the table, with an away trip to Offaly next as they seek to switch divisions for the eighth successive season. Longford, meanwhile, will certainly be in a relegation dogfight for the second year in a row. CAVAN: R Galligan, E Finnegan, P Faulkner (0-1), N Carolan, Ciaran Brady, D McVeety (0-1), T Madden, D Brady (0-1), K Clarke, G Smith (0-2), Cian Madden (0-3), J McCabe, B Boylan (0-2), R O’Neill, O Brady (1-2, two frees). Subs: P Lynch (0-3) for O’Neill (43 mins), Conor Madden (0-4) for O Brady (46 mins), R Donohoe for D Brady (54 mins), K Brady for N Carolan (57 mins), S Smith for G Smith (62 mins). LONGFORD: P Collum, P Fox, A Farrell (0-1), B O’Farrell, I O’Sullivan, PJ Masterson, R Moffett, K McGann, D Gallagher, J Hagan (0-2), D Reynolds (0-1), L Connerton (0-2), D Mimnagh, D McGivney (0-2 frees), R Smyth (0-3, two frees, one mark). Subs: M Quinn for B O’Farrell (blood sub 14 mins, reversed 18 mins), R Brady for K McGann (h-t), A Farrell for R Smyth (54 mins), F Sheridan for D Gallagher, P Lynn for PJ Masterson (both 57 mins), D Farrell for D Mimnagh (61 mins). Referee: K Faloon (Armagh) A strong second half display enabled Westmeath to repeat last year’s Tailteann Cup win against neighbours Offaly in what was a very competitive and hard-fought game played in front of a very big crowd in Mullingar. The home team got off to a great start when corner back Jack Smith was fouled inside the Offaly square in the third minute and goalkeeper Ian Duffy was black-carded. John Heslin converted the resultant penalty. Wind-assisted Offaly made light of their numerical disadvantage and a terrific brace of points from Anton Sullivan ensued before Heslin slotted over a routine free in the 14th minute after sub goalie Corey White had overcarried. Dylan Hyland hit a hat-trick of points – the second of them from a free – to put Liam Kearns’ charges ahead by 0-5 to 1-1 after 24 minutes. Just before the third of Hyland’s points, Ronan O’Toole had a goal attempt at the other end saved by Duffy, who had been restored between the posts. Conor McNamee and Hyland (from a 45) pointed to put Offaly three clear, but Ray Connellan was on target with the last kick of the half. Offaly deservedly led by 0-7 to 1-2 at the interval. On the change of ends, two early frees from Hyland doubled Offaly’s advantage, but O’Toole neatly reduced the deficit in the 42nd minute. Three more Westmeath points followed from Heslin (a free), Conor McCormack, and Luke Loughlin (a 45). The sides were on level terms (1-8 to 0-11) when experienced sub Kieran Martin fisted the ball to the net in the 61st minute at the end of a Heslin free (which Martin himself had won). With the wind behind them, Dessie Dolan’s troops took over at this juncture, with Martin unlucky not to double his goal tally when his rasping shot went over via the crossbar. WESTMEATH: J Daly; J Smith, K Maguire, N Harte; J Dolan, D Lynch, S McCartan; S Duncan, R Connellan (0-1); S Baker (0-1), R O’Toole (0-2), C McCormack (0-1); L Dolan, J Heslin (1-4, goal from penalty, four frees), L Loughlin (0-1, ’45). Subs: D Scahill for Smith (27 mins), C Dillon for Lynch (half-time), K Martin (1-1) for L Dolan (49 mins), S Smith (0-1) for Loughlin (55 mins), A McCormack for Baker (59 mins). OFFALY: I Duffy; C Donnelly, D Hogan, D Dempsey; R Egan, P Cunningham, L Pearson; J McEvoy, C McNamee (0-1); C Donohoe, R McNamee, B Carroll; B Allen, A Sullivan (0-4), D Hyland (0-6, three frees, one ‘45). Subs: C White for Allen (5 mins), B Allen for White (17 mins), N Dunne (0-1, free) for Allen (half-time), J Maher for Carroll (52 mins), C Farrell for Pearson (69 mins). Referee: D Coldrick (Meath)