Sir, – In the hours and days after a major humanitarian emergency, speed is critical. We undoubtedly witnessed this in the intense efforts to save the thousands of lives of those buried under rubble following the catastrophic earthquake that struck southern Turkey and northwest Syria on February 6th. The ability to quickly support those who survive but are so desperately impacted, having lost loved ones, homes and livelihoods is also crucial. Within hours of the disaster, we were so heartened by the enormous outpouring of generosity from the Irish public to support Goal’s emergency response and, in tandem, heartened by the Irish Government’s announcement of funding support as the scale of the devastation became clear. This was quickly followed by a further funding announcement and the delivery of over €800,000 worth of humanitarian aid supplies by air, to Adana airport in southern Turkey last Thursday evening. Goal and Concern logistics teams were ready to receive these 100 tonnes of life-saving aid which comprised cargo of tents, thermal blankets, solar lamps, hygiene kits, kitchen sets and water cans. This was all enabled by the relentless pragmatism and “red tape shedding” of the Department of Foreign Affairs. For this extraordinarily rapid and characteristically generous response from the Government, we are deeply grateful. This is the largest-ever deployment of emergency stocks under Ireland’s Rapid Response Initiative, as part of Ireland’s €10 million allocation for the earthquake response. As I write, Goal, our humanitarian colleagues at Concern and our partners are working quickly to distribute these emergency items to victims of the harrowing earthquake in the disaster hit regions. Our CEO, Siobhan Walsh, and our teams across the world, have also been deeply moved by the warmth and messages of sympathy received, following the loss of 31 dear colleagues. This is a powerful statement: that Ireland’s humanitarian instincts, honed over many decades and, unfortunately, by so many crises, are stronger than ever. It is on occasions like this that Goal is more than proud of its Irish roots and stands with Irish Aid (the Government’s programme for overseas development), the Irish public and in unison with other partners, to deliver effective and appropriate support quickly to those most severely impacted. Thank you. – Yours, etc, BARRY O’CONNELL, Chairman, Goal Global, Dún Laoghaire, Co Dublin.