There was no single source of inspiration, I was possessed by no spirit. I read a book by Colonel Frederick Bailey called the Mission to Tashkent. He was sent by the British to see what the situation was like around the time of the Revolution. A lot of adventures ensued but he ran into a Sarajevan who was working for the Bolsheviks, but who told him that he knew who he was and that he would help because all he wanted was to get home to Sarajevo. I was interested in someone whose only plan and ideology was returning home. That was the beginning. The death of a child changes everything in ways that are too many, too small and too big to recount. For one thing, you become even more alert to the ever-present possibility of catastrophe. The novel took its own time, because it covers a lot. Whatever language I am writing in is my first language at the time of the writing. But the other language[s] are always present, like extra dimensions. In a two-dimensional system multidimensional objects can only be represented in two dimensions. In the minds of multilingual people, words/objects are present differently. I don’t know if that affects my style. I have no access to any other style. There was no particular response, certainly not from the Nobel Committee or Handke. A lot of Bosnians and people from the Balkans knew that Handke was a genocide denier, just as they knew that Muslim lives are less valuable to the sophisticated European readers who pretend that politics and literature are strictly segregated. The Russian invasion of Ukraine is genocidal. It was and is made possible by the appeasers of Putin, the buyers of his oil, who had VIP seats for the Olympics in Sochi and the World Cup. Also, my mother identifies herself as Bosnian and Yugoslav, not Serb. I’ve spent more time in France than in Serbia in my life. I have no Serb background. It was great. Lana and David are close and beloved friends of mine, and they are brilliant thinkers and writers. I learned a lot from them, and loved every minute of it. [ Meena Kandasamy Q&A: ‘I went to where Sylvia Plath is buried, and sat there hugging her gravestone’ ] Presently, I am focused on producing music as Cielo Hemon. I went to Drohobych because that was where Bruno Schulz lived and died. I never listened to writing advice. My parents. I would instantly ban any kind of music that identifies itself as “light” or “smooth”. The only podcast I listen to is Scriptnotes, produced by Craig Mazin and John August, who are brilliant screenwriters. I am also enjoying The Last of Us, for which Craig Mazin is the showrunner. Shanghai. In 1972, my father gave me a chess board, and inscribed my name and the year on it. I still have my first English-Serbo-Croat dictionary, now more than 50 years old. I’ve been to many writers’ dinner parties. They’re not all that they’re made out to be. There is a lot of gossip and everyone is always aware of the present hierarchies. I’d rather have a dance party with writers, in which case everyone would be welcome. [ Joseph O’Connor Q&A: Every good writer aims for the ability to make something difficult seem effortless ] There are a lot of smart people in Princeton. There is little to do here after dinner. “Love is the weight of the soul” – Hannah Arendt. Leopold Bloom. Anything by Gary Shteyngart. My Heart by Semezdin Mehmedinović, tr. Celia Hawkesworth.