At a special summit hastily concluded in the early hours of Friday morning, EU leaders agreed a tough package of measures intended to help countries strengthen their borders against unwanted migration. Leo Varadkar, returning to his first summit since returning to the Taoiseach’s Office, was among the heads of government who pledged to make it harder for people to enter the EU illegally and return those who do. Among the measures agreed by EU leaders was to ask the European Commission “to immediately mobilise substantial EU funds and means” to help countries bolster their “border protection capabilities and infrastructure.” The summit conclusions referenced “surveillance, including aerial surveillance, and equipment.” Leaders stopped short of specifically providing money for border fences. But EU funding for surveillance and border patrols means that member states can spend their own money on border fences. The Taoiseach was forthright in his language, marking a change in tone on the sensitive issue of migration that is evident from ministers of late. He said that Ireland had to take an approach to migration that was “fair, firm and hard”, and be ready to send home people who come to Ireland to claim asylum under false pretences. Varadkar was careful to stress that people who are fleeing persecution and war are entitled to the protection that Ireland can offer, and that the country needs immigrants to staff its hospitals and other vital services. But he must be careful that his language does not give succour to those whose goal is to generate an atmosphere that is unwelcoming to immigrants, including those who arrive here seeking asylum. It must be stressed that such people are not illegal immigrants; until such time as their case for asylum has been definitively rejected, they are legally entitled to remain in Ireland. The Government, it appears, is trying to sound tougher on the subject of illegal immigration in the hope that this will dissuade many people from coming to Ireland. The numbers seeking protection have soared, right at the time that the State has accepted large numbers of Ukrainian refugees, and the pressure on resources and accommodation is plain. But this is a delicate line to walk between implementing existing migration policy and being seen to move in response to the anti-migrant protests. The Taoiseach and his ministers need to take the utmost care. It is true, as European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said at the conclusion of the summit, that borders must be protected. That is, after all, a legal obligation of governments everywhere. But it is also a legal obligation of governments to offer protection to people who are fleeing danger, and need help.