* Q&A: How will the new Windsor Framework change the Northern Ireland protocol? Read here * Windsor Framework: What are the main points of the new UK-EU deal? Read here US president Joe Biden said the protocol deal was an essential step to ensuring that the “hard-earned peace and progress” of the Belfast Agreement was preserved. “I look forward to continuing to work closely with our partners in Northern Ireland, the governments of the United Kingdom and Ireland and the European Union to further peace and prosperity,” the president said. Democratic congressman and ranking member of the Ways and Means Committee of the US House of Representatives Ritchie Neal said the protocol deal was  the result of constructive, continued engagement by the European Union and the UK in search of joint solutions. “I appreciate the steadfast commitment and compromise by both sides to find common ground to resolve the trade frictions related to the protocol  on Ireland and Northern Ireland. Ahead of the 25th anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement, now is the time to protect the hard-earned gains of the agreement, and to deepen EU-UK co-operation and partnership for generations to come.” – Martin Wall, Washington Correspondent Tory Eurosceptics warned Rishi Sunak the “devil lies in the detail” as they said they will closely examine his deal on post-Brexit rules for Northern Ireland. The UK prime minister received support from several of his MPs after announcing the “breakthrough” with the European Union in a bid to remove trade barriers. But prominent Eurosceptics made clear they will reserve judgment on the “Windsor Framework” until they have fully read the documents. Former minister Mark Francois, chairman of the European Research Group (ERG) made up of anti-EU Tory MPs, sought assurances he “won’t find any nasty surprises” when analysing the deal. He thanked Mr Sunak for publishing the white paper and legal text on the same day, adding: “As a former chancellor, he knows well that on budget day the government puts a good gloss on whatever they’re putting to the public but then you have to read through the red book to just check on the fine detail. “He’s worked very hard on this so can he assure me and the whole House that when we go through the red book, or in this instance the detailed legal text, we won’t find any nasty surprises which will materially undermine the position of Northern Ireland in the United Kingdom?” Mr Sunak said: “I believe it meets the objectives that we set out to do.” He added: “I’m confident that when he goes through the detail he will see that this is a good agreement, it’s the right agreement for Northern Ireland, for the people of Northern Ireland and it’s a way for our United Kingdom to move forward together.” Conservative Bill Cash, who chairs the European Scrutiny Committee, said: “The [prime minister] will know that in the papers that have been published this afternoon the devil as ever lies in the detail.” Mr Sunak would not be drawn on when parliament would have a say on the agreement, earlier saying: “Parliament will of course have its say and there will be a vote. But we will need to do that at the appropriate time as we give people the time and space to consider the detail.” Conservative former prime minister Theresa May, who initially tried to secure a deal with the EU following the 2016 referendum, was among those to welcome the agreement. She said: “The Northern Ireland Protocol negotiated and signed by the government in December 2019 adopted the European Union’s preferred proposal of a border down the Irish Sea. “Can I congratulate the prime minister and the secretary of state for Northern Ireland and foreign secretary, and all their teams, for all the work they have done to achieve this negotiated settlement which will make a huge difference.” She added: “Does he agree with me that the best move now is for everybody across this house to support this settlement, because that is what is in the best interests of all the people of Northern Ireland?” Mr Sunak replied: “I agree with her. What all of us should have at this moment at the top of our minds is the people of Northern Ireland and what is in their interest. “I hope when people have the time and space to consider the Windsor Framework, that they will see that this is the best way to move forward and build that better future in Northern Ireland.” Conservative former Brexit secretary David Davis gave his backing to the deal, describing it as “a spectacular negotiating success”. Dame Andrea Leadsom, another Tory ex-cabinet minister, said: “It certainly seems to me, reflecting back over the last five years, that at any point in that time if this deal had been on the table, those of us who are Brexiteers, those of us who are Remainers, those of us who are unionists, would have jumped on it.” DUP MP Sammy Wilson (East Antrim) told Mr Sunak: “I welcome the 18-minute confession which the prime minister undertook about the damage which the protocol, which his Government signed, has done to Northern Ireland.” He voiced concerns about the impact of EU law and the veto mechanism proposed, saying he still “fears our position in the United Kingdom is not going to be restored” by the agreement. Labour leader Keir Starmer earlier said his party would support the deal and committed not to “play political games”. SNP Westminster leader Stephen Flynn said “broadly speaking, I am fully supportive” of the Windsor Framework, but he said “we cannot and we should not forget the damage which has been done by leaving the European Union”. The new agreement between the European Union and British government on the Northern Protocol has provided solutions that are “agreeable, workable and durable,” Taoiseach Leo Varadkar has said. Mr Varadkar said that the solution was a “uniquely favourable” arrangement for Northern Ireland as it would allow for free movement of goods between it and Britain. He also said the Windsor Framework would not water down the Protocol. However, he accepted that the EU was willing to make more concessions because of the challenges facing Europe, particularly the energy crisis. He said Brexit was a concept on paper before it became operational. After it happened, there was more understanding of how Brexit and the Protocol had affected trade movement in reality. “It made us understand what aspects of it were not necessary and we were able to take some of those away,” he said. Speaking at Government Buildings, Mr Varadkar said Brexit had been destructive to people on this island. He said the Protocol had been designed to prevent hard borders on the island of Ireland but added: “Its operation has led to some problems for business and made trade more complicated than it needs to be.” He said the agreement would bring stability and certainty to a situation that has been in flux since the decision by the UK to leave the EU nearly 7 years ago. “I firmly believe people in Northern Ireland do not want to return to divisions of the past. They want progress and a shared future”. Asked what was different about British prime minister Rishi Sunak’s approach, Mr Varadkar said a lot of trust had been built up between the European Commission and Mr Sunak and his team through behind-the-scenes work. “It does make a difference. It was done in a way that builds confidence and trust,” he said, adding that the exchange of data on trade and the movement of goods was helpful. Tánaiste Micheál Martin said the agreement would pave the way for Northern Ireland’s political institutions to be restored “without delay”, a year after the Executive and Assembly were suspended. Mr Martin, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, said the same food will be available on supermarket shelves in Northern Ireland as in the rest of the UK. Medicines will also be available to people in Northern Ireland at the same time and under the same conditions as the rest of the UK, he added. Sinn Féin leader Mary Lou McDonald said her party had made it clear throughout the process that there would be no hard Border on the island. “It is crucial that the agreement works for ordinary people across the island, including businesses and the wider community,” she said. Leading Irish American congressman Brendan Boyle, who is also co-chair of the US Congressional Caucus on the European Union, strongly backed the new deal. He also urged that there should be a return to Stormont as soon as possible. “I enthusiastically commend negotiators from the European Union and the British government for reaching a deal on the Northern Ireland Protocol,” he said. “It is now incumbent upon all of the parties in the Northern Ireland Assembly to return to government and make the institutions work for all.” - Harry McGee The Windsor Framework addresses the so-called “reach-back” of European Union state-aid law by imposing “stringent new tests”, Rishi Sunak has said. The UK prime minister told the Commons: “Because we now have control over VAT policy, we can make sure that the EU’s plan to reduce the VAT threshold by £10,000 will not apply in Northern Ireland and nor will the SME VAT directive that would have brought huge amounts of EU red tape for small businesses. “We are also making subsidy control provisions work as intended. Already just 2 per cent of subsidy measures in Northern Ireland fall within the scope of the EU approval under the protocol. Nevertheless, today’s agreement goes further, addressing the so-called ‘reach-back’ of EU state aid law. “It does this by imposing stringent new tests. For the EU to argue we are in breach of their rules, they now have to demonstrate that there is a real, genuine and material impact on Northern Ireland’s trade with the EU.” King Charles’s “constitutionally unwise” meeting with European Commission chief Ursula von der Leyen has angered unionists as UK prime minister Rishi Sunak sought their support over the new post-Brexit deal on Northern Ireland. Leading Conservative Brexiteer Jacob Rees-Mogg said it was wrong to involve Charles in the “immediate political controversy” on the day the prime minister signed a new agreement with her. Baroness Arlene Foster, the former Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) leader and first minister of Northern Ireland, said the meeting in Windsor Castle was “crass and will go down very badly”. Buckingham Palace said the king was acting on “the government’s advice”. Downing Street said it was “fundamentally” a decision for the king. The king welcomed Ms Von der Leyen to Windsor Castle at the end of her busy day following a joint press conference with Mr Sunak to outline the new deal dubbed the “Windsor agreement”. The briefing for the major political development, which in some ways aims to heal tensions between the UK and EU, was staged at Windsor Guildhall where the king and the queen consort married in 2005, a ceremony that set the seal on their long relationship. Charles was pictured warmly shaking hands with the EU chief in a drawing room of the royal residence where they were served tea during their discussions said to be very productive. Topics covered included climate change and the Russian invasion of Ukraine, but it is not known if Northern Ireland was on the agenda. There have been reports suggesting the meeting was arranged following a direct approach by the EU chief to Buckingham Palace, but this would be highly unusual as the normal channels of communication would go through the UK government. A Buckingham Palace spokesman said: “The king is pleased to meet any world leader if they are visiting Britain and it is the government’s advice that he should do so.” But ahead of the king’s audience with Ms Von der Leyen, Mr Rees-Mogg, a former cabinet minister, said: “It is surprising that the king will meet Ursula von der Leyen today as it antagonises the people the prime minister needs to conciliate. “It is also constitutionally unwise to involve the king in a matter of immediate political controversy.” Baroness Foster added: “I cannot quite believe that No 10 would ask HM the king to become involved in the finalising of a deal as controversial as this one. It’s crass and will go down very badly in NI. “We must remember this is not the king’s decision but the government, who it appears are tone deaf.” There had been warnings the meeting could draw the king, who as head of state must remain politically neutral, into the process of the UK and EU agreeing a deal or be seen as tacitly endorsing it. Before the king and EU chief met, Downing Street defended the move to advise the king to meet Ms Von der Leyen, saying Mr Sunak “fundamentally” believed the final decision was for the monarch. “He firmly believes it’s for the king to make those decisions,” the prime minister’s official spokesman said. He compared the Von der Leyen meeting to the king talking to Poland’s Andrzej Duda or Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelensky. Asked why the final protocol talks were taking place in Windsor, he said: “There are a number of occasions when these sorts of talks have been held in significant locations, this is no different.” Conservatives were among those voicing their criticism of the meeting before it was even confirmed, following suggestions the deal would be called the “Windsor agreement”. And Sammy Wilson, the DUP’s chief whip, said the expected meeting would risk dragging the king into a hugely controversial political issue”. Royal commentator Peter Hunt, tweeted about the king: “He’s abandoned his unifying role and entered the political fray, in a foolish bid to be seen as statesmanlike. “History won’t be kind. Someone’s head will roll.” European Commission deputy chief spokeswoman Dana Spinant insisted the meeting was “not part of this process” to secure a deal. Downing Street said it “stands ready” to speak to the DUP and answer any questions about the new protocol deal. UK prime minister Rishi Sunak’s official spokesman said the government had “published a great deal of information today and it is understandable that communities, political parties, businesses, will want to take the time to read through it, to get to grips with the detail and obviously ask questions, and we stand ready to answer those questions on their behalf and I am sure there will be specific engagement with parties and parliamentarians to that end.” He said No 10 would not “speculate on what the DUP may or may not do”. “We stand ready to speak to the DUP, or indeed any other political parties, and answer any questions they may have.” The DUP has given its first reaction to the deal agreed between the European Union and the UK. The party’s leader, Jeffrey Donaldson, said it was “clear that significant progress has been secured across a number of areas” but there “remain key issues of concern”. “There can be no disguising the fact that in some sectors of our economy EU law remains applicable in Northern Ireland,” he said, adding that the DUP wanted to study the detail of what had been published and assess it against its so-called “seven tests” and “whether it respects and restores Northern Ireland’s place within the United Kingdom.” In a statement released on Monday afternoon, Mr Donaldson said his party’s “judgment and our principled position in opposing the protocol in parliament and at Stormont has been vindicated. “When others said there would be no renegotiation and no change our determination has proved what can be achieved.” He thanked UK prime minister Rishi Sunak and his predecessors “for their work and significant engagement to date” and welcomed “the publication of the outcome of the government’s negotiations with the EU which ends a period of speculation and spin, often from those who know little about Northern Ireland. “In broad terms it is clear that significant progress has been secured across a number of areas whilst also recognising there remain key issues of concern. “There can be no disguising the fact that in some sectors of our economy EU law remains applicable in Northern Ireland.” The opinion of the DUP is seen as a key bellwether for the success of any deal, with the party’s backing crucial to restoring powersharing at Stormont. Mr Donaldson said his party would now “study the detail” of the Windsor Framework, “as well as examining the detail of any and all underpinning legal texts”. “Where necessary we stand ready to engage with the government in order to seek further clarification, reworking or change as required. “Ultimately the party will now assess all these proposed outcomes and arrangements against our seven tests, outlined in our 2022 Assembly election manifesto, to determine whether what has been published meet our tests and whether it respects and restores Northern Ireland’s place within the United Kingdom.” Other political parties in Northern Ireland have also been giving their reaction, though all have said they will take time to study the detail of the deal. Speaking to reporters in the Great Hall in Stormont, the Sinn Féin vice-president and the North’s first minister designate, Michelle O’Neill, welcomed the deal and said: “I think most people in society out there will welcome the fact that we’re at the end of this negotiation, that’s complete, and I think most people’s minds here at home will very quickly turn to the fact that we need to be in this institution, we need to be working together.” She said the detail of the deal was still coming through and her party would continue to work through it over the course of Monday. “I was always very clear that the protections that were secured within the protocol were necessary, they remain necessary,” she said. “The fundamental priorities for us were the protection of the Good Friday Agreement, the all-island economy, protecting those things that were working and then smoothing out the things that need to be fixed, I hope that’s the position we’re standing in this evening.” The SDLP leader Colum Eastwood said his party’s “primary goals have been to retain the benefits of dual market access for businesses in Northern Ireland, restore the democratic institutions of the Belfast Agreement and to send politicians back to work in the interests of all our people. “My appeal to political leaders is to approach this moment in good faith and with a common determination to restore our Assembly and Executive,” he said. “To those intent on intervening in this process to bolster their own political position I would say this: do not attempt to wreck this deal, to demolish the hope of a resolution that serves the people of Northern Ireland.” The protocol deal should be enough to satisfy “reasonable unionists”, Northern Ireland Office minister Steve Baker said. He told the BBC: “My reading of the text, which I’ve had the opportunity to do carefully, is that this should be good enough for any reasonable unionists. “There are unionists who would dig a moat between the North and the South, those unionists will never be happy. “But I think for reasonable unionists – and the DUP are determined but reasonable unionists – I think this deal will be good enough. And if it’s not, I’m really not sure what we’re going to do for them.” Ulster Unionist leader Doug Beattie said his party would study in detail what was in the Windsor Framework. He said: “We will study what has been released in detail with the attention and careful consideration that it deserves. “We will be reflecting on whether the proposals take into consideration the concerns that we have raised and whether it truly provides long-lasting solutions. “Let me be clear, we are not here to simply give cover to anyone. “We will form our opinion based on whether we believe this is a good deal for Northern Ireland and one which protects our place within the United Kingdom’s internal market. “Finally, it is important to acknowledge that we were told this was something that couldn’t be done. “If we had listened to those who said the EU had gone as far as they could then we would not have reached this point. “I am proud of the role my party has played in engaging across the UK, European Union and beyond in making the pro-Union case on the problems caused by the protocol and in bringing the EU back to the negotiating table.” Alliance leader Naomi Long said she would like to examine the detail of the protocol deal. “We’ve been very clear from the beginning what our expectations would be, we would want to still maintain dual market access, that’s important for businesses in Northern Ireland,” she said. “We also want to see a reduction in the amount of bureaucracy that the protocol creates, particularly for those who are importing goods from GB into Northern Ireland. “We’re also looking for stability because businesses are telling us very clearly that what they want are stable outcomes. “If we have that stability and clarity, and we maintain dual market access but with a reduction in bureaucracy, then I think that that’s a good deal.” Ms Long added: “All of us would like to see the relationship with the EU in a better place, I think the UK as a whole needs that, but I think it would also be good for north/south and east/west relationships because they’ve been damaged by Brexit.” – Freya McClements, Northern Editor; and PA Rishi Sunak says there would be a parliamentary vote on the new Windsor Framework “and it will be respected”. The UK prime minister said he and European Commission president Ursula Von der Leyen had made a “decisive breakthrough” by agreeing the Windsor Framework, which he said had “changed” the Northern Ireland protocol. “It is the beginning of a new chapter in our relationship,” said Mr Sunak. “We have had our differences in the past but we are allies.” He said the agreement would “end the uncertainty” for the people of Northern Ireland. The deal, which will be subject to a vote in Westminster at the “appropriate time”, includes green and red lanes for imports into the North. It returns to Westminster the power to set all VAT rates. It contains safeguards to ensure that all supermarket goods and medicines available in Britain will automatically be available in the North. And it includes a “Stormont brake” giving the North’s Assembly an “emergency” mechanism to stop EU laws applying with which it disagrees. “If the brake is pulled, the UK government has a veto,” said Mr Sunak, who insisted it was a “powerful safeguard”. Ms Von der Leyen said: “We knew it was not going to be easy [to reach agreement].” Leading Irish American congressman Brendan Boyle, who is also co-chair of the congressional EU caucus, strongly backed the new Northern Ireland protocol deal. He also urged that there should be a return to Stormont. “I enthusiastically commend negotiators from the European Union and the British government for reaching a deal on the Northern Ireland protocol. In particular, I want to thank British prime minister Sunak, EU commission president von der Leyen, and EU commission vice-president Sefcovic. It is now incumbent upon all of the parties in the Northern Ireland Assembly to return to government and make the institutions work for all.” – Martin Wall, Washington Correspondent Business groups in Northern Ireland and the Republic have been reacting to the announcement of a deal between the UK and the European Union. The Northern Ireland Business Brexit Working Group, an umbrella group representing 14 industry bodies, said it commended the “considerable efforts made by the EU and the UK government to find joint solutions on the Northern Ireland protocol. “From the outset our priority has been to secure an agreed, durable outcome that protects our consumers and enables our businesses to thrive,” the group said in a statement. “Reaching an agreement is an important step in securing the stability and certainty businesses have been seeking. “While we do not doubt that many issues will have been resolved, others may remain and/or arise in future, so we would encourage the UK and EU to continue with a constructive, solutions-focused approach as businesses adjust to the new arrangements. “It is our shared aspiration that this agreement will deliver a unique platform that unlocks economic growth and investment, but we will now need time and space to work through the technical detail with our members,” the group said. The consortium represents industry groups such as Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce, CBI NI, Northern Ireland Retail Consortium and the Ulster Farmers’ Union. Logistics UK, the industry body representing the transport industry, said the agreement was “positive news for industry” and that it would “take time to work through the technical details” with logistics businesses in Northern Ireland. The president of the Londonderry Chamber of Commerce, Selina Horshi, said it was “positive news”. “This has been a turbulent period for businesses, and clarity and certainty are welcome,” she said, adding that she was “hopeful that this deal now paves the way for the full and speedy return of the Executive and Assembly at Stormont.” Business representative group Ibec has also welcomed the breakthrough, saying it would afford certainty for businesses across the all-island economy. Ibec chief executive Danny McCoy said the Windsor Framework must now be supported through close collaboration between business and government in Northern Ireland, Ireland, Britain and the European Union. “While we await to examine the finer details of the agreement, it is imperative that today’s announcement will sustain the stability that has delivered two decades of investment and growth across the island of Ireland. “It also affords a fresh opportunity to re-establish political stability in Northern Ireland. The island of Ireland faces several economic headwinds but is positioned to successfully navigate them, and today’s announcement will further help this.” – Freya McClements, Simon Carswell and Harry McGee UK prime minister Rishi Sunak has said his “decisive breakthrough” on post-Brexit rules for Northern Ireland will remove trade barriers in the Irish Sea as he seeks the backing of unionists and Tory Eurosceptics. The prime minister said the controversially-named “Windsor Framework” finalised with the European Union on Monday would deliver smooth flowing trade and “safeguards sovereignty”. Mr Sunak and European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen agreed the long-awaited deal over the Northern Ireland protocol after a meeting in Windsor lasting under two hours. The EU chief will go on to have tea with King Charles at Windsor Castle despite criticism that the meeting would drag the monarch into the politically contentious deal. At a press conference in Windsor Guildhall, Mr Sunak said: “I’m pleased to report that we have now made a decisive breakthrough. “Together we have changed the original protocol and are today announcing the new Windsor Framework. “Today’s agreement delivers smooth-flowing trade within the whole United Kingdom, protects Northern Ireland’s place in our union and safeguards sovereignty for the people of Northern Ireland.” Mr Sunak said the agreement “safeguards sovereignty” for Northern Ireland. He said the deal introduces a new Stormont brake, allowing the assembly not only to have a say over EU laws but also to block them from applying in Northern Ireland. “This will establish a clear process for which the democratically elected assembly can pull an emergency brake” for changes to EU rules on goods that would have a “significant and lasting” effect on everyday life, he said. If the brake is pulled, the UK government will have a veto, he added. Ms Von der Leyen said the European Court of Justice (ECJ) is the “sole and ultimate arbiter of EU law” and will have the “final say” on single market decisions. “Indeed, the European Court of Justice is the sole and ultimate arbiter of EU law – that’s natural because it’s prescribed by the EU order. So the ECJ will have the final say in EU law and single market decisions,” she said. But Ms von der Leyen said that through the new framework each side has “worked hard” to add the new Stormont brake. She added that it remains an emergency mechanism that hopefully will not need to be used. Ms von der Leyen said the EU is fully committed to safeguarding the Belfast Agreement and to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland. “Extensive consultations” with the UK and Northern Ireland will regulate the system, she said. The pound has jumped higher after Britain and the European Union secured a new post-Brexit deal for Northern Ireland in a move set to end long-running tensions following the UK’s withdrawal. Sterling leaped 0.7 per cent higher to $1.20 and was 0.3 per cent up at €1.14 after a Government source said British prime minister Rishi Sunak and European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen had signed a breakthrough deal at a meeting in Windsor, Berkshire. The FTSE 100 Index was also trading 0.6 per cent or 50.7 points higher at 7,929.4 in afternoon trading on Monday. The deal is set to finalise Brexit more than six years after the 2016 referendum, and to resolve the trading issues created by the Northern Ireland protocol. But there are lingering concerns over the challenge ahead for Mr Sunak, who still has to win the approval of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) to ensure powersharing can be restored in Northern Ireland, and amid pressure on the prime minister to give MPs a Commons vote. Susannah Streeter, head of money and markets at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Dawn may be about to break on a new era of calmer relations between the UK and the European Union, but hopes still aren’t racing away that it will herald a significant post-Brexit boost for the economy. “This new consensual approach should help for other thorny political problems such as migration, but in itself it’s unlikely to move the dial much for a big uplift to UK trade immediately. “There are some lingering concerns about opposition in parliament, which would have to ratify the deal, but the power of the Conservative rebels has been weakened.” Walid Koudmani, chief market analyst at XTB, said the EU-UK deal regarding Northern Ireland will end a lengthy period of uncertainty. But he added that the pound is likely to see heightened volatility until any deal is finally given the all-clear by the DUP and Tory Eurosceptics. “Any further roadblocks in the process could prove to be quite counterproductive for the moods of investors and could lead to a pullback from current levels which have already acted as a resistance in the past,” he said. British prime minister Rishi Sunak has signed a breakthrough deal with the European Union over post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland and will now seek to win the backing of unionists and Tory Eurosceptics. Mr Sunak and EU chief Ursula von der Leyen finalised the long-awaited agreement to ease the trading issues created by the Northern Ireland protocol during a summit at Windsor on Monday, a senior Government source told the PA news agency. “An agreement has been reached. The deal is done,” they said. The European Commission president will go on to have tea with King Charles at Windsor Castle despite criticisms that the meeting would drag the king into the politically contentious deal. Mr Sunak hopes the deal will win the approval of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) so powersharing can be restored in Northern Ireland to get Stormont back up and running. DUP support would also be key in convincing Conservative Brexiteers to back the deal as pressure mounted on Mr Sunak to give MPs a Commons vote. British prime minister Rishi Sunak and European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen have struck a deal over the Northern Ireland Protocol, a senior Government source has said. Freya McClements, Northern Editor, reports The DUP leader Jeffrey Donaldson has rejected a suggestion in the Irish News that the DUP is expected to accept the deal on the Northern Ireland protocol, which is being finalised on Monday. It quoted a “source with knowledge of the DUP’s thinking” and said a “dinner has been pencilled in for this evening in London with party supporters” with the MP Sammy Wilson to explain the DUP’s position. In a social media post on Monday afternoon, Mr Donaldson said “anonymous sources strike again” and the party would “take our time to consider the detail and measure a deal against our seven tests.” He added: “PS – a busy day and no dinner planned either – story entirely fictional.” Speaking to the BBC earlier, Mr Donaldson said he had not seen the legal text of any deal but once he had “we’ll come to a view on that.” Asked if he felt positive, he replied “I’m neither positive nor negative, I think we need to take time to look at the deal, what’s available and how does that match our seven tests” and the timescale would be determined by “how long it takes.” Tánaiste Micheál Martin said there has been “a genuine attempt” to resolve issues with the protocol raised by unionists and that the looming possible deal represents a chance to reset British-Irish relations. “All of those issues that have been raised, I think people will find a genuine attempt at a response to those issues,” he told RTÉ News at One. “I respect that this is a matter that the DUP would have to consider within its party. “I would say that, genuinely, the European Union has listened to the concerns that have been articulated consistently by the DUP, the UUP and others in Northern Ireland in respect of the operation of the protocol.” Mr Martin added: “It’s fair to say that the Brexit situation, the protocol, all of those issues, have created challenges for the British-Irish relationship over the last three years and I think the resolution of these issues will give an opportunity to really reset the British-Irish relationship into the future. “So, it’s very, very important for us that the EU-UK relationship is normalised and – to use president von der Leyen’s words – that the UK is seen as a partner and a friend, and not a source of ongoing friction between the EU and the United Kingdom.”— PA European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen has arrived at the Fairmont Hotel in Windsor Park, Berkshire, for talks on a new post-Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. She arrived in an entourage of four cars. Britain’s prime minister Rishi Sunak greeted Ms von der Leyen as she stepped out of her car. The pair spoke briefly before walking towards the hotel entrance, pausing to speak again just before heading inside. After the talks, Ms von der Leyen will go on to meet the King. Mr Sunak to make statement in UK parliament on Northern Ireland at 6.30pm. — PA Britain’s King Charles will host EU chief Ursula von der Leyen at Windsor Castle despite warnings that the meeting will drag the monarchy into the political announcement on a new Brexit deal. Downing Street has defended the decision to advise the king to meet Ms von der Leyen as the UK and the EU seal a new Brexit deal on Northern Ireland. The British prime minister’s official spokesman said Rishi Sunak believes “fundamentally” the decision was for Buckingham Palace. “He firmly believes it’s for the King to make those decisions,” the official said. “It’s not uncommon for His Majesty to accept invitations to meet certain leaders, he has met president Duda and president Zelensky recently. He is meeting with the president of the EU today.” Asked why the final protocol talks were taking place in Windsor, the spokesman said: “There are a number of occasions when these sorts of talks have been held in significant occasions, this is no different.” There were fears the king, who as head of state must remain politically neutral, might be drawn into the process of the UK and EU agreeing the new deal or be seen as tacitly endorsing it. Conservatives were among those voicing their criticism of the meeting before it was even confirmed, following suggestions the deal would be called the “Windsor Agreement”. Sammy Wilson, the chief whip of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), which Mr Sunak wants to secure the support of, said the expected meeting risked “dragging the king into a hugely controversial political issue”. Leading Tory Brexiteer Jacob Rees-Mogg said it would be a mistake for Ms von der Leyen to meet the king during her visit to the UK. The former Cabinet minister told GB News: “I think the sovereign should only be involved when things have been completed and accepted. — PA European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen arrived in today saying she was looking forward to opening a new chapter in diplomatic relations. “I’m looking forward to turning a page and opening a new chapter with our partner and friend,” she said on Twitter. She will meet British prime minister Rishi Sunak, seeking to finalise details of a new deal on post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. — Reuters European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen will meet King Charles when she visits Britain on Monday, a Buckingham Palace source said. The European Commission’s president is visiting Britain for final talks with Britain’s prime minister Rishi Sunak on a new deal on post-Brexit trade rules for Northern Ireland. “The King is pleased to meet any world leader if they are visiting Britain and it is the Government’s advice that he should do so,” a palace spokesperson said. — Reuters British labour leader Keir Starmer said the task now facing the British prime Minister was to sell the protocol deal to his own Tory MPs. Mr Starmer said that if he was in No 10 he would “restore trust” between the UK and European Union. With Rishi Sunak poised to announce a deal on changes to the Northern Ireland Protocol, Mr Starmer said there were practical steps “that could have been taken 18 months, two years ago, but we’ve been stuck in an impasse”. Speaking in the City of London, he said: “The EU and the UK are probably in agreement, or very near to agreement at this stage. “The question will be whether the prime minister has got the strength to sell it to his backbenchers or not. “Many people will be frustrated that this is the loop we’ve been stuck in for a very, very long time and it’s not something you would have with a Labour government because we don’t have those divisions in our party on this issue.” — PA Irish Times Public Affairs Editor Simon Carswell has written an explainer on the deal the might be reached. The former Northern Ireland secretary, Theresa Villiers, has said it is “crucial parliament has a vote” on the much-anticipated deal to end the dispute with the EU over post-Brexit trading arrangements in Northern Ireland. Ms Villiers was speaking just hours before the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, was due to meet British prime minister Rishi Sunak for what No 10 has billed “final talks” over a revised Northern Ireland protocol pact. Ms Villiers, who campaigned for Brexit while in her post in Northern Ireland, where the majority voted to remain in the EU, said she did not know how she would vote on the new deal but wanted one that would enable the return of the Democratic Unionist Party to the devolved government in Stormont. “I want to see a deal which delivers a return to powersharing in Northern Ireland,” she told BBC Radio 4′s Today programme. In what could be the most perilous week of his political life, the prime minister will meet von der Leyen at lunchtime on Monday. The cabinet will meet shortly after, when Sunak, the foreign secretary, James Cleverly, and the Northern Ireland secretary, Chris Heaton-Harris, will give an update on the talks. Mr Sunak and Ms von der Leyen will then head to Windsor, raising speculation as to whether the European Commission chief will meet King Charles in a gesture that has already been widely criticised after plans for such an arrangement were made for Saturday and then cancelled. — Guardian Pat Leahy writes: British prime minister Rishi Sunak and president of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen will meet in the UK today to sign off a new agreement on the Northern Ireland protocol after months of negotiations. Focus will immediately switch to the Democratic Unionist Party whose leader Jeffrey Donaldson must now decide if he should back the deal and restore the Stormont powersharing institutions. Mr Donaldson’s spokesman gave no indication last night of his intentions, but it is expected Mr Sunak will press ahead with or without the DUP’s agreement, said sources. Mr Sunak’s task of securing the acceptance of the deal from hardline Eurosceptics in his party will be made considerably harder if the DUP oppose it, however. Taoiseach Leo Varadkar said he had been in touch with Ms von der Leyen and “very much” welcomed the news of a meeting. The expectation that a deal was about to be announced grew in London yesterday after Mr Sunak and his ministers went on a media offensive over the weekend, with the prime minister telling the Sunday Times he was “giving it everything” in order to “get the job done”. In other media interventions, Mr Sunak boasted of his Brexiteer credentials and said he wanted to “finish the job” of implementing Brexit. Sources in Dublin and Brussels said they were on standby for an agreement and confirmation came yesterday evening when Downing Street and the commission said the two leaders would meet today to seal an agreement. It is expected Mr Sunak will seek cabinet approval in the afternoon and make a statement in the House of Commons later. Sources with knowledge of briefings in Dublin, Brussels and London say the components of a new agreement on the protocol have been in place for some time and it remains for Mr Sunak to manage the politics in Westminster and Belfast. That will not be an easy task. Hardliners in his own party insisted yesterday that Northern Ireland must be treated the same as any other part of the UK, something the British government has not sought and which would end the North’s dual access to the UK and EU markets. Chairman of the European Research Group of hardline Conservative MPs Mark Francois told Sky News that they wanted “a situation where EU law is expunged from Northern Ireland so it is treated on the same basis as England, Scotland and Wales.” “We’re not stupid,” he told the broadcaster. In response to questions from The Irish Times, a spokesman for Mr Donaldson said the “objective in London and Brussels should be to get this right rather than rushed. The wrong deal will not restore powersharing but will deepen division for future generations.” Mr Donaldson insisted the “seven tests” his party requires to support an overhaul of the current post-Brexit trading arrangements will be “how we will judge any deal between the EU and UK”. Among the tests, set out in July 2021, is the removal of all checks on goods crossing the Irish Sea as well as the people of Northern Ireland having a say in making the laws that govern them. “So let’s focus on the prize of a long-lasting solution instead of a short-term fix. The protocol must be replaced by arrangements that restore NI’s place in the UK internal market and our constitutional position must be respected.” Asked on Sunday if he believed a deal could win the support of the DUP, Tanáiste Micheál Martin replied: “I hope so.”