A new generation takes over the leadership of the Social Democrats on Wednesday when Cork South-West deputy Holly Cairns becomes party leader unopposed following the decision of founding co-leaders Róisín Shortall and Catherine Murphy to step down. Cairns’s elevation to the position became inevitable when the party’s three other TDs — it has six in total — said they would not stand for the job and were happy to support her candidacy. It will be the latest stage in a rapid political ascent for the 33-year-old; it is not yet four years since she was first elected as a member of Cork County Council and just three since she first became a TD. She will become the youngest party leader in the Dáil. Since entering parliament, Cairns has become an accomplished media and Dáil performer, particularly vocal on social issues. Recently she revealed the level of abuse that she — and many other politicians, especially female ones — endure on a regular basis. Her decision to speak out was commendable and courageous. Her appointment is likely to herald some excitement in the Social Democrats. It is not just a young party, many of its activists are also young and they will hope that Cairns can appeal to unaligned young voters in the period between now and the next general election. That Cairns comes from their generation, speaks their language and is motivated by many of the same issues — climate change, gender equality, social inequality — that concern them will help her. It is not hard to see her establishing a connection with a mass of broadly social democratic voters looking for a political home. And yet she will face daunting challenges, too. The Social Democrats are hardly Ireland’s only social democratic option, and few of the party’s existing seats — including her own — could be considered safe. Local and European elections loom next year, and a general election not far beyond. Finding space to shine in the non-Sinn Féin parts of the Opposition is hard. Like any party leader, Cairns will know that she will be judged mercilessly on election results.