Directed by Sarah Polley. Starring Rooney Mara, Claire Foy, Jessie Buckley, Judith Ivey, Ben Whishaw, Frances McDormand. 15A cert, gen release, 104 min Women from a Mennonite community debate how to respond to male violence in Polley’s thoughtful, forensic adaptation of a novel by Miriam Toews. Cunningly drawn characters fleshed out by excellent actors keep the exchanges sharp and engaging. Through it all, Polley allows bursts of weirdness and humour to punctuate deliberation that, though often abstract, never becomes alienatingly cerebral. A shot of male teenagers spilling down a dusty road is, though superficially banal, almost as troubling as flashbacks of an older character spitting out her teeth. A knobbly, awkward, singular film that stays with you. Full review DC Directed by Steven Soderbergh. Starring Channing Tatum, Salma Hayek Pinault, Ayub Khan Din, Jemelia George, Juliette Motamed, Vicki Pepperdine. 16 cert, gen release, 112 min If you want Tatum to grind his crotch in your face for two hours, then…well, you had better look elsewhere. Originally planned as an HBO Max release costarring Thandiwe Newton, Magic Mike’s Last Dance is, mildly lubricious top and tail excepted, the most chaste sequel you’ll see this side of Fern Gully 2: The Magical Rescue. Hayek’s media magnate hires Tatum’s resting stripper to spice up a West End show. In between saucy action at top and tail, we get a tepid though stylish version of a Cliff Richard musical from the pre-swingin’ era. Full review DC Directed by Georgia Oakley. Starring Rosy McEwen, Kerrie Hayes, Lucy Halliday, Lydia Page. 15A cert, gen release, 97 min. A gay PE teacher in 1980s Tyneside lives her life as the Thatcher government promotes the notorious homophobic Section 28 legislation. An elegantly structured film composed of clever, delicate movements, every aspect of Oakley’s debut feature - from Izabella Curry’s editing to Kirsty Halliday’s period costuming - is as restrained as Rosy McEwen’s excellent performance. Historical context adds gravitas to the project. Glimpsed television newscasts and the casual use of the word “pervert” in the changing room evoke all the fears and prejudices bound up in Section 28. Full review TB Directed by David Alaux. Voices of Rob Beckett, Giovanna Fletcher, Josh Widdecombe. G cert, gen release, 95 min Substandard French cartoon telling the story of Jason and the Argonauts with cute animals. Randomly, characters on screen burst into song before apparently forgetting the musical component altogether. There’s some kind of martial arts school for rats. Other rats imitate The Godfather or rather imitate Shark Tale imitating The Godfather. Lobsters with vaguely Caribbean accents lobby for peace and love. Still, the whacky gags with hydra heads will amuse younger viewers. And we won’t hear a word against the seagull channelling Long John Silver. Full review TB