Rare indeed is the Six Nations championship that has everyone purring after just two rounds. If the organisers could rewind the clock they might have preferred Ireland v France as the tournament’s grand finale but, in some ways, a round-two classic has worked a treat. Quite apart from lifting neutrals out of their seats it has also raised the bar quality-wise for everyone else. Given it is a Rugby World Cup year, it feels like the fun is only just beginning. Particularly if you are Irish. If there has been a more gloriously complete Six (or Five) Nations performance by an Ireland side it was hard to recall as they blasted past the French in Dublin on Saturday. Shamrock-and-roll is rugby’s modern soundtrack, with even bigger stadium gigs still to come. Much has already been written about the well-stocked pool of Irish schools talent and artful player management that help Ireland turn up on big occasions looking half a yard fitter and fresher than their opposition. What is even more striking is how visibly individuals are improving. Hugo Keenan, Josh van der Flier and Caelan Doris could well be the best players in their positions in the world, while Finlay Bealham, Tom O’Toole, Ross Byrne and Craig Casey are starting to underline their squad’s increasing strength in depth. Success, in other words, breeds success. Which is why a Grand Slam already seems to be theirs to lose. Beyond that? Well, their World Cup record is famously rubbish – they have never made it past the quarter-finals – and their half of the draw also contains France, South Africa, New Zealand and Scotland. Only two of those six teams can make the semi-finals. Suddenly, though, that is probably Ireland and one other, which will be giving this autumn’s hosts even more palpitations than last Saturday’s result. The way to beat France has certainly been demonstrated. With a ball-in-play time of 46 minutes – the equivalent figure for the England v Italy game was 37 minutes – their big forwards were made to play a game that absolutely did not suit them. Yes, Antoine Dupont is absolute class – how good was that tackle on Mack Hansen? – but with three rounds still to play he and some of his team-mates already look in need of a breather. Scotland, unbeaten after two matches for the first time in the Six Nations era, might be heading to Paris next week at an opportune moment. The Scots, if not quite at Ireland’s level yet, also look like a team on the up. Duhan van der Merwe and Finn Russell have deservedly grabbed the headlines but Sione Tuipulotu, Blair Kinghorn, Ben White, Matt Fagerson and George Turner are contributing importantly, too. It has reached the point where Kinghorn will be mighty unlucky if he does not start in Paris, relegating last season’s captain, Stuart Hogg, to the bench. There is a wider question, though. As the standard of Europe’s top sides rises, where does that leave those struggling to catch up? While Wales still have good individual players, they have been blown out of the water so far by sides playing faster, smarter, more skilful rugby. No shame in that necessarily, but it is already clear that even a consummate turnaround specialist like Warren Gatland has his work cut out. And England? They have a new coaching team but, in many ways, familiar problems persist. Any rebuilding job invariably takes time but what people are less keen to discuss is the deadline for this project’s completion. Steve Borthwick is entirely justified in prioritising small steps and incremental improvements but the loud ticking noise in the background is not going away. Unless the Rugby Football Union has already given up on winning this year’s Rugby World Cup, in which case there should be mass administrative resignations. So, yes, England’s maul worked better against a sub-par Italy. Yes, they have finally picked an inside-centre who can take the ball to the line and get them on the front foot. But the differences in cohesion, consistency, vision and tactical innovation compared with, say, Ireland, are clear. And to expect Borthwick and his lieutenants to bridge that gap in a little over six months feels unrealistic. The upshot is that England fans will have to be patient. Borthwick openly admits it is impossible to solve everything all at once. The best-case scenario is that England’s scrum, maul and lineout will all be tightened up and that a restrictive, suffocating game plan will make them harder to beat. But the game is moving on fast. Ireland, France and Scotland all look comfortable in possession, all with influential outhalves whirling the creative baton. England, having opted for Owen Farrell over Marcus Smith, seem to have decided that, for now, their best option is simply to batten down the hatches. Short-term, it is a commonsense approach. Longer-term it is storing up trouble. Even with a decent lead against Italy it was telling that Borthwick felt unable to take off his captain, Farrell, and allow Smith to play with other centres at his elbow. Do people really see Farrell, who will only be 32, walking away from Test rugby after this World Cup and handing over the keys to Smith for the next four years? There is more chance of Vladimir Putin hosting a pre-match picnic in the West Car Park. It is not a dilemma that is going to fade away. But does that mean for Smith’s future Test career? Or England’s prospects at the 2027 men’s World Cup? England, as Borthwick accepts, are currently behind many of their major rivals. Getting ahead of the curve again is not going to be easy. – Guardian