Sir, – Last Thursday, as Civil Engagement Group Senators, we signed a cross-party Seanad motion condemning Russia’s many breaches of international law, endorsing stronger sanctions, recognising the importance of prosecution for war crimes, and supporting increased humanitarian and stabilisation aid for Ukraine. On Friday, we also signed a separate letter to The Irish Times calling for a focus on peace negotiations rather than military escalation. In signing the motion and letter, our key considerations were that they each condemned the illegal Russian invasion, recognised Ukraine’s right to national sovereignty and supported initiatives towards peace based on the strong principles of the UN Charter. Those principles include Article 51 on the inherent right to self-defence and Article 2 which prohibits the use of force against the territorial integrity of another state, as reflected in the recent UN General Assembly motion, which we welcome and support, calling for Russian withdrawal from Ukraine. The UN Charter also emphasises human rights and calls on all nations to work actively for peace. Peace negotiations consistent with the charter are about applying international political pressure in a constructive way – that does not mean compromising Ukrainian territorial integrity or sovereignty. We believe Ireland, as a neutral country with a historic record on international law and peace-building, has the potential to play a positive role in that vital but difficult work. – Yours, etc, Senator ALICE-MARY HIGGINS, Senator LYNN RUANE, Senator FRANCES BLACK, Senator EILEEN FLYNN, Leinster House, Dublin 2. Sir, – No one would disagree that an end to Russia’s war on Ukraine and the achievement of peace are much desired objectives, as is the restoration of Ukrainian sovereignty over Ukrainian territory illegally occupied by Russia. It is, however, odd that the small group of TDs and Senators believe this can be achieved by Ireland becoming “an advocate for peace” and using its position as a neutral country “to call for a ceasefire and peace negotiations”. Ireland until the end of last year was a member of the UN Security Council and was unable to prevail on Russia to end its war. As the conflict would end and there would be peace if Vladimir Putin simply withdrew all Russian forces from Ukrainian territory, perhaps the group would attempt to visit him in Moscow as a delegation, call on him to do so and make themselves available to the Russian media to discuss their condemnation of Russia’s invasion and “brutal tactics”. This would test the sincerity, credibility and effectiveness of their proposition. Before doing so, they might find it helpful to read the famous Skibbereen Eagle editorial of 1898 on Tsarist Russia which pledged that the paper “would keep its eye on the emperor of Russia and all such despotic enemies – whether at home or abroad – of human progression and man’s natural rights, which undoubtedly include a nation’s right to self determination.” They might find it a useful prompt should they engage with Russia’s 21st-century tsar. – Yours, etc, ALAN SHATTER, Dublin 16. Sir, – We support Ukraine’s right to militarily resist Putin’s illegal, unjustified invasion but still call for diplomatic efforts to achieve peace. Claims of total victory for Ukraine actually mean total war, with all the guarantees of utter devastation and annihilation for many in what has become a bloody war of attrition. The terrible human costs on both sides are ignored by the military leaders who seem blithely content to intensify militarisation. In Nato’s case, the explicit aim is to help Ukraine defeat Russia, even all the way to Moscow for some. So western leaders discourage and squander any possibility of peace talks. Yet many western military strategists acknowledge that neither Russia or Ukraine can win this horrific war of attrition and that it is leading toward a stalemate. The risks of a messy peace grossly outweigh the risks for total victory for Ukraine. Irish political leaders should be at the forefront of trying to achieve a diplomatic solution that includes a withdrawal of all foreign military from Ukraine and a lasting peace that respects the culture of all ethnic groups. – Yours, etc, MARNIE HOLBORROW, JIM ROCHE, Irish Anti-War Movement, Dublin 1. A chara, – Gerard Toal makes the proposition that it must be Ukraine who must take even more pain and sacrifice in the pursuit of an “ugly peace” (“Reality of war will undermine seductive Ukraine storylines”, Opinion & Analysis, February 25th. No such demand is made of Putin, who is merely required to return to internationally recognised borders. This “peace” would be meaningless and an invitation to like-minded despots everywhere to attack neighbours with impunity unless the sovereignty of Ukraine is preserved on all our behalfs. – Is mise, RAY McCARTHY, Dublin 9. Sir, – In response to 12 members of the Oireachtas, I challenge the signatories to elaborate on acceptable conditions for a ceasefire. The letter proposes a false dichotomy between escalation and peace negotiations. First, reduced military support would weaken Ukraine’s negotiating position. Second, a ceasefire only works if there are credible defence guarantees for Ukraine. Without guarantees, a ceasefire buys Putin time to launch another attack! – Yours, etc, FERGAL McGOVERN, London. A chara, – The 12 members of the Oireachtas who call for a change in Irish policy regarding Putin’s war in Ukraine do not represent the views of the overwhelming majority of TDs and Senators. Nor do I believe that they represent the views of their electorates nor the Irish people. While the dozen condemn Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, at no stage in their letter do they seek the withdrawal of Russia’s occupying forces. The presumptions stated in the letter as to knowing what is best for the Ukrainian people to promote their right to self-determination and national sovereignty are quite arrogant. It is for the people of Ukraine to determine their own future and to defend their homeland. We know that this brave nation is fighting for its very existence. But perhaps the attitude of some of the signatories is not surprising as they include the tiny minority of Irish parliamentarians who sat on their hands and refused to applaud when the Ukrainian president addressed the Houses of the Oireachtas last year. The signatories make mention of the principles of the UN Charter. Every one of these principles has been violated by Vladimir Putin. He has engaged in a genocide against the Ukrainian people. He has no respect for multilateralism nor the rule of law. To expect that he will respect peace negotiations based on the UN Charter shows a naivety, at best. Ireland is a non-aligned nation militarily but that does not mean that we should not call out wrong when it comes to illegal wars and human rights abuses. We all desire peace but that will never come about by appeasing bullies. Ireland must and will continue to stand in strong support of Ukraine and her people. Russia must withdraw and end its campaign of terror. – Is mise, Senator MALCOLM BYRNE, Fianna Fáil, Leinster House, Dublin 2. Sir, – I have great deal of respect for many of the TDs and Senators who signed the letter calling on Ireland to use its neutral position to “advocate for peace”. Unfortunately, similar to the recently published letter from the Peace and Neutrality Alliance, these letters are long on lofty ambitions for peace, but short on how this is to be achieved when a violent aggressor invades a sovereign democratic country, and has gone on to commit various war crimes, including the indiscriminate bombing of civilians in non-combat areas. Every right-thinking person wants this war to end, but the only way that President Putin will countenance some form of ceasefire and negotiated settlement is if his “special military operation” is repelled or if there is a stalemate, with neither side being able claim a victory. Sadly, these scenarios can only be achieved by military means, especially given the sanctions enforced by the EU and others are having little effect. What these letter writers should be advocating for is solidarity among all democratic countries in supporting Ukraine at this terrible time, and reminding everyone that the fate of the Ukrainian people could ultimately be our fate if Putin is victorious. – Yours, etc, ROBERT CHESTER, Dublin 16.