Ireland 5 Italy 7 (11′) Lorenzo Cannone, off the back of a well worked lineout makes another powerful break right through the heart of the Irish defence and Italy are five metres out. But this time Andrew Porter does brilliantly to secure a turnover and Lowe clears his lines. Italy are playing with such confidence and energy! Ireland 5 Italy 7 (7′) What a try and Italy strike back straight away. Stephen Varney spots the gap after a superb move. Lightening quick recycling of ruck ball and a superb break by Lorenzo Cannone creates the opportunity. The conversion from Paolo Garbisi squeezes in. Ireland 5 Italy 0 (3′) What a crazy start! 45 seconds later and Ireland have their first try. From the restart, Bundee Aki does brilliantly to offload to Lowe who feeds James Ryan in the left corner for his fifth try in green. Byrne misses the conversion. NO TRY! Lowe knocked it on whilst grounding! Game on! Ireland kick the action off, Ross Byrne’s first touch on his first Six Nations start. Italy gather in their 22 and clear their lines. Hugo Keenan fields it for his first touch and Ireland’s first attack ends in a try!! Josh van der Flier makes the initial break and James Lowe touches down in the corner... TMO is having a look... Conditions in Rome as the teams come out - 18 degrees and dry. Five minutes until kick-off! Andy Farrell’s pre-match thoughts... Andy Farrell has made six changes to his Ireland team for today’s match in Rome. Halfbacks Craig Casey and Ross Byrne come in for what will be just their second and third Test start, while Iain Henderson replaces the injured Tadhg Beirne. Jack Conan, Ronan Kelleher and Bundee Aki also rotate in from the start. In a late change on Friday, Leinster centre Garry Ringrose was ruled out due to injury with Stuart McCloskey (who started in the wins over Wales and France) replacing him. [ Mike Catt expects Garry Ringrose to return for Six Nations final stages ] Johnny Watterson looks at the Italy team, as the days of moral victories are now insufficient for ambitious and new-look side. Read that here... Craig Casey makes his first Six Nations start this afternoon. Gerry Thornley looks back at the young scrumhalf‘s career to date… [ Craig Casey’s chance to shine latest chapter in heart-warming story of resilience ] A look back at Gordon D’Arcy’s column from midweek… “Saturday’s game doesn’t operate in a vacuum, it has context for the Six Nations, the World Cup and the inner workings of the squad, in terms of the pecking order.” [ Gordon D’Arcy: Italy v Ireland is one of Andy Farrell’s last chances to experiment before the World Cup ] Check out Gerry Thornley’s preview in full here Here’s an all you need to know guide for Italy v Ireland, Stadio Olimpico, kick-off 2.15pm... STARTING TEAMS IRELAND: Hugo Keenan (Leinster); Mack Hansen (Connacht), Bundee Aki (Connacht), Stuart McCloskey (Ulster), James Lowe (Leinster); Ross Byrne (Leinster), Craig Casey (Munster); Andrew Porter (Leinster), Rónan Kelleher (Leinster), Finlay Bealham (Connacht); Iain Henderson (Ulster), James Ryan (Leinster, capt); Caelan Doris (Leinster), Josh van der Flier (Leinster), Jack Conan (Leinster). Replacements: Dan Sheehan (Leinster), David Kilcoyne (Munster), Tom O’Toole (Ulster), Ryan Baird (Leinster), Peter O’Mahony (Munster), Conor Murray (Munster), Jack Crowley (Munster), Jimmy O’Brien (Leinster). ITALY: Ange Capuozzo; Edoardo Padovani, Juan Ignacio Brex, Tommaso Menoncello, Pierre Bruno; Paolo Garbisi, Stephen Varney; Danilo Fischetti, Giacomo Nicotera, Simone Ferrari; Niccolò Cannone, Federico Ruzza, Sebastian Negri, Michele Lamaro (capt), Lorenzo Cannone. Replacements: Luca Bigi, Federico Zani, Marco Riccioni, Edoardo Iachizzi, Giovanni Pettinelli, Alessandro Fusco, Luca Morisi, Tommaso Allan. Hello and welcome... Ireland take on Italy this afternoon in Rome, with Andy Farrell’s team looking to make it three Six Nations wins from three. It’s an opportunity too for the six players who come into the team from the win over France, some due to injury and the others in rotation. World Cup squad and starting places are up for grabs. So lots to play for, and after Italy’s encouraging start to the championship, there’s no room for complacency. We’ll keep you up to date with all the match build up and action as it unfolds. Be sure to get in touch with your comments - Twitter: @DonoghueEamon - for now though, let’s get started!!