Sir, – Unlike Peter Mulvany (Letters, February 23rd) who considers a citizens’ assembly as “an undemocratic quango”, I adjudge them as a further valuable addition to our democratic process. Canada and Australia have also made extensive use of them as an important form of deliberative democracy. To ensure equality of representation each county receives an amount of invitations proportionate to its overall population. Critics of citizens’ assemblies seem to fear the voices of citizens more than the voices of members of our Oireachtas which are often muted by party chief whips. – Yours, etc, BRENDAN BUTLER, Dublin 9. Sir, – I completely agree with Peter Mulvany’s letter in relation to citizens’ assemblies. Not only do we have citizens’ assemblies wasting money and time but we also have working groups, special Oireachtas committees, tons of reports from civil servants and external consultants and the now famous “public consultation”. Does the elected Government not have the capacity to make decisions anymore or should external consultants and “experts” rule the country? – Yours, etc, LIAM DORAN, Dublin 22. Sir, – These assemblies are set up by a process which is far from transparent and which purports to create a representative sample of society. They are then asked to consider major public policy issues while taking input from speakers chosen in an equally opaque manner. When it suits Government, the outcomes of the assemblies’ deliberations are then represented as reflecting the views of society as a whole. The only legitimate citizens’ assembly in Ireland is Dáil Éireann which is elected in a transparent and democratic manner. It is in this assembly – Ireland’s parliament – that public policy must be debated and formed, with an opportunity for interest groups to make their case publicly to elected representatives. Citizens’ assemblies are an undemocratic and insidious influence on public policy formation which should be done away with at the earliest opportunity. – Yours, etc, JOE LENIHAN, Dublin 9.