It is one year since Russia started its invasion of Ukraine. Our writers around the world and at home continue to bring you complete coverage of the conflict that has reshaped the world. [ Full coverage of the conflict and the anniversary ] Russia has to lose its war in Ukraine so it stops seeking to conquer territories it once controlled, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said on Friday, the first anniversary of Russia’s full-scale invasion. “Russia must lose in Ukraine,” Mr Zelenskiy told a conference in Lithuania via video-link. “Russian revanchism must forever forget about Kyiv and Vilnius, about Chisinau and Warsaw, about our brothers in Latvia and Estonia, in Georgia and every other country that is now threatened.” Lithuania is a member of Nato and the European Union that was once under the control of Moscow. Earlier on Friday, Mr Zelenskiy said on Telegran: “This will be the year of our victory.” “On 24 February, millions of us made a choice. Not a white flag, but a blue and yellow flag. Not fleeing, but facing. Facing the enemy. Resistance and struggle. It was a year of pain, sorrow, faith and unity. And this is a year of our invincibility. We know that this will be the year of our victory!” – Additional reporting Reuters Britain is prepared to supply fighter jets to eastern European allies to enable them to release their Soviet-era planes to Ukraine, while Denmark is ‘open’ to the idea of sending fighter jets to Ukraine. UK defence minister Ben Wallace said backfilling allies with the UK’s jets to free up their own would be a quicker way to bolster Kyiv’s defences than providing them with British Typhoons. Britain announced a new package of sanctions, imposing an export ban on every piece of equipment Russia has been found using on the battlefield in Ukraine. Also on Friday, the Danish defence minister said his country is “open” to the idea of sending fighter jets to Ukraine to help its war effort, according to state broadcaster, DR. “I won’t rule out that at some point it may be necessary to look at the contribution of fighter jets,” acting defence minister Troels Lund Poulsen said. The Danish air force has purchased 77 F-16 jets since the 1970s, according to the armed forces. Around 30 of them are currently in operation, according to local media reports. Ukraine has this year asked Western allies for more advanced weapons including fighter jets. Western countries that have provided Ukraine with arms have so far refused to send fighter jets or long-range weapons capable of striking deep inside Russia. – PA/Reuters Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg on Friday reacted reservedly to a Chinese proposal for a ceasefire in Ukraine, saying Beijing did not have a lot of credibility as a mediator. “China doesn’t have much credibility because they have not been able to condemn the illegal invasion of Ukraine,” he told reporters in Tallinn, adding Beijing had signed an agreement with Russian president Vladimir Putin only days before the invasion. European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen said China had not shared a peace plan but some principles. “You have to see them against a specific backdrop, and that is the backdrop that China has already taken sides by signing, for example, an unlimited friendship right before the invasion,” she noted. “So we will look at the principles, of course, but we will look at them against the backdrop that China has taken sides,” she added. – Reuters Taoiseach Leo Varadkar said that Ukraine would “prevail” in its war against Russia, as he promised enduring Irish support for the country after a year of war. As Ukrainians and the country’s allies mark the one-year anniversary of the Russian invasion, Mr Varadkar also praised the response of the Irish people to the conflict. Around 75,000 people from Ukraine have arrived in Ireland since the war began last February, with many taken in by households across the country. “In marking this awful anniversary, we think of the scale of suffering by the people of Ukraine, of lives lost, opportunities stolen and whole towns destroyed,” Mr Varadkar said. “We are humbled by their brave and spirited defence of their country, and we commend their immense courage and resolve. They have been an inspiration to those of us who value freedom and democracy. “We think also of the response of the Irish people, who in communities across the country have warmly welcomed people fleeing from war and persecution with an enormously generous spirit. “Irish people have shown empathy and compassion in standing up for what is right. “We are demonstrating through our actions that the experiences of the Irish and our diaspora down the years have shaped us as a nation and moulded our values, finding a resonance today in the suffering of others. “I pay tribute to all who have opened their hearts, their homes and their communities to a people in need. It has been a great and unprecedented national effort that reflects well on who we are.” Last July, then-taoiseach Micheál Martin visited Kyiv to show Irish support for the Ukraine. In his statement, Mr Varadkar warned that it remained unclear when the war would end. He predicted “difficult days and months” ahead for the country. But he said: “I know that Ukraine will continue be strong and that Ireland will continue to stand with it for as long as it takes. “In defending their country, Ukrainians are defending the fundamental values of the UN Charter. “They are standing up for the right of countries throughout the world to live peacefully, within their own borders, and according to their own values and choices. “Right is on their side. They will prevail. Slava Ukraini.” – PA Russia’s Wagner group of mercenaries has taken full control of the Ukrainian village of Berkhivka, on the outskirts of Bakhmut, Wagner founder Yevgeny Prigozhin said on Friday. “Berkhivka is fully under our control. Units of Wagner Private Military Company are in full control of Berkhivka,” he said in a post on social media. Berkhivka is about 3km northwest from the suburbs of Bakhmut, a frontline city that has seen intense fighting. – Reuters President of the European Council Charles Michel has posted a message in support of Ukraine. In a video uploaded to Twitter, Mr Michel said: “Today is a dark anniversary ... for one year, you, Ukrainians have fought back with courage.” “Ukraine will prevail. You will prevail. And you will live in peace and freedom. A free and independent Ukraine is a free and independent Europe.” The UN overwhelmingly voted yesterday to call for Russia to immediately and unconditionally withdraw from Ukraine, marking one year since Moscow’s invasion by calling for a “comprehensive, just and lasting peace”. Applause broke out when the result was announced, with Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, calling the resolution “a powerful signal of unflagging global support for Ukraine” in a tweet late on Thursday. The resolution on Thursday night saw 141 countries in favour with seven against and 32 abstentions, including China. Russia had worked hard to try to end its isolation by blaming the west for pouring arms into the region and by pointing to the growing hunger crisis it blamed on western sanctions. China has called for a ceasefire in Ukraine, urging western powers to lift sanctions against Russia and warning Moscow against the use of nuclear weapons, writes our China correspondent, Denis Staunton. A 12-point position paper published by the foreign ministry in Beijing on the first anniversary of Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine says the conflict can only be resolved through negotiation. “Conflict and war benefit no one. All parties must stay rational and exercise restraint, avoid fanning the flames and aggravating tensions, and prevent the crisis from deteriorating further or even spiralling out of control. All parties should support Russia and Ukraine in working in the same direction and resuming direct dialogue as quickly as possible, so as to gradually de-escalate the situation and ultimately reach a comprehensive ceasefire,” it said. China has declared itself to be neutral in the war, neither endorsing nor condemning the invasion but the United States and its allies claim that Beijing is backing Moscow. US secretary of state Anthony Blinken said this week that China is considering supplying lethal military equipment to Russia, a claim Beijing has denied. Friday’s position paper reaffirms China’s stated commitment to respecting the sovereignty, independence and integrity of all countries “big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor”. But it says that the security of one country must not be pursued at the expense of another, calling for the abandonment of the Cold War mentality. “Dialogue and negotiation are the only viable solution to the Ukraine crisis. All efforts conducive to the peaceful settlement of the crisis must be encouraged and supported. The international community should stay committed to the right approach of promoting talks for peace, help parties to the conflict open the door to a political settlement as soon as possible, and create conditions and platforms for the resumption of negotiation,” it says. A minute’s silence was held in the Dáil on Thursday to commemorate the one-year anniversary of the Russian invasion. Ukraine’s ambassador to Ireland Larysa Gerasko was present in the chamber as well as members of the international diplomatic corps. Ceann Comhairle Seán Ó Fearghaíl said as the Dáil marked the first anniversary of Russia’s “unlawful and brutal war, we remember and stand in solidarity with the people of Ukraine”. “We acknowledge the generosity of the Irish people and their kindness and welcoming spirit in having almost 77,000 Ukrainian displaced people in our country at this present time,” he said. Sarah Burns was in the Dáil yesterday – you can read her full report here. As Moscow and Beijing warned that the war could spiral into a wider international conflict, Russian president Vladimir Putin pledged to strengthen his nuclear arsenal and Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg noted “signs” that China might supply weapons to Russia and said it “should not be part of that”. Commenting on photographs from 12 months of fighting that have killed tens of thousands of people and displaced millions, Mr Zelenskiy said they “leave deep scars in your heart and soul. They remind us of the path we have gone from February to February. It must be in our DNA.” Read the full report here.