As expected, Andy Farrell has promoted six players from the replacements’ bench who helped to seal the epic win over France for Ireland’s third match of the 2023 Guinness Six Nations against Italy at Rome’s Stadio Olimpico on Saturday. The most eye-catching sees Craig Casey partner Ross Byrne in what will be just a second and third Test start for both halfbacks, and a first start in the Six Nations for each player. The 23-year-old Casey made his international debut in the corresponding round three game in Rome two years ago, but his only start to date was in the win over the USA in July 2021 when a restricted crowd of 3,000 was permitted. Byrne’s two starts both came in defeats against England at Twickenham, namely in the 2019 World Cup warm-up match and in the 2020 Autumn Nations Cup. [ Italy team to face Ireland: Paolo Garbisi returns at outhalf ] In light of the ankle injury Tadhg Beirne suffered against France which ended his run of 14 consecutive Test starts Iain Henderson, who was a replacement in both of the Welsh and French games, when replacing Beirne in the 46th minute, is reunited with James Ryan, who captains the side for a seventh time. It will be Henderson’s first Test start since last season’s Six Nations. Jack Conan has also been promoted at number eight with Caelan Doris, man of the match against France, shifting to blindside as Peter O’Mahony is named on the bench. Ronan Kelleher impressively bridged a gap of exactly one year from Test rugby with his performance off the bench against France and now makes his first Test start since that round two game last year. Dan Sheehan, who missed the French game a fortnight ago with a hamstring strain, is among the replacements. There is also an element of rotation at inside centre, where Bundee Aki starts after filling his brief as an impact replacement in Ireland’s last three games, a role which is now handed to Stuart McCloskey. Dave Kilcoyne and Tom O’Toole remain the backup props, while Ryan Baird is recalled to the bench. Conor Murray and Jack Crowley are the backup halves. [ Italy v Ireland: Kick-off time, TV details, Ireland team and more ahead of Six Nations meeting in Rome ] “We have been together for a good few weeks now, so people are certainly up to speed,” Farrell stressed. “People wouldn’t have been selected if they weren’t in the right place. “So, we’re not just turning things around for the sake of it. We are turning things around because we think it’s a strong side for us going forward, for this game and for the future as well.” Farrell also made it plain that he expects a far more cohesive performance than, say, was the case for the second of the Autumn Series games against Fiji. “Again, the lads that have come in for the first time in this competition have been with us for four weeks. So, the reality is, this is our third game of the competition and we expect it to be our best performance of the competition. That’s how it should be and that’s what we are aiming for.” While it came as no surprise that Casey and Byrne would fill the halfback roles, likewise it was entirely in keeping with the squad selections up to now that Crowley is on the bench and in line for just his third cap. By the same token, bringing Carbery back into the environment – and he will be one of the additional players on the plane to Rome on Thursday – extends a note of encouragement to him while underlining the competition at halfback “Ross and Jack we wanted to have a look at and keep developing,” said Farrell. “Ross had earned the right and there is a bit of feedback to Joey. Him coming back into camp, we get to have the chat again about his reflection about the feedback etc and where is he now with all that. “He gets to back that up with the conversations and him back into the environment and lets everyone know that the competition keeps rolling on.” On Ryan assuming the captaincy again in the absence of Johnny Sexton, who will also travel with the squad, Farrell said: “I’ve seen him grow massively as a leader because of the leaders he’s got around him. I’ve seen all of them grow in a huge way over the last couple of years and James just happens to be one of those leaders who will put his hand up week-in, week-out, and lead from the front in how he performs on the field. “He’s got massive respect in that regard but his leadership off the field has been pretty impressive as well.” A fortnight after Ryan, Andrew Porter and Kilcoyne reached the same landmark, Garry Ringrose will win his 50th cap in the Stadio Olimpico. “It’s a special moment. It was special for us all to be involved with three lads a few weeks ago and it was a great occasion for them so there’s no one more deserving than Garry. “He’s had a few injuries in the last few years that have probably taken a few caps away from him but to be able to do it at the age he has as well as losing those games says a lot about the type of player that he is. He’s in top form right now and he’s only going to get better.” IRELAND: Hugo Keenan (Leinster); Mack Hansen (Connacht), Garry Ringrose (Leinster), Bundee Aki (Connacht), James Lowe (Leinster); Ross Byrne (Leinster), Craig Casey (Munster); Andrew Porter (Leinster), Rónan Kelleher (Leinster), Finlay Bealham (Connacht); Iain Henderson (Ulster), James Ryan (Leinster, capt); Caelan Doris (Leinster), Josh van der Flier (Leinster), Jack Conan (Leinster). Replacements: Dan Sheehan (Leinster), David Kilcoyne (Munster), Tom O’Toole (Ulster), Ryan Baird (Leinster), Peter O’Mahony (Munster), Conor Murray (Munster), Jack Crowley (Munster), Stuart McCloskey (Ulster). ITALY: Ange Capuozzo; Edoardo Padovani, Juan Ignacio Brex, Tommaso Menoncello, Pierre Bruno; Paolo Garbisi, Stephen Varney; Danilo Fischetti, Giacomo Nicotera, Simone Ferrari; Niccolò Cannone, Federico Ruzza, Sebastian Negri, Michele Lamaro (capt), Lorenzo Cannone Replacements: Luca Bigi, Federico Zani, Marco Riccioni, Edoardo Iachizzi, Giovanni Pettinelli, Alessandro Fusco, Luca Morisi, Tommaso Allan