Republic of Ireland manager Vera Pauw has added Aoife Mannion and Marissa Sheva to her squad ahead of a monumental year for Irish football. Unlike Jack Grealish, Mannion is the one that has not got away. Four times the 27 year old sat on the bench for England in 2019. Called in by former English manager Phil Neville, the daughter of Irish parents was an unused substitute against Belgium, Norway, Portugal and Brazil. Fifa subsequently cleared her transfer to Ireland. A childhood friend of Grealish, they sat beside each other at St Peter’s Catholic School in Solihull, even playing Gaelic Football on the same field in Warwickshire before both signed for Aston Villa as teenagers. Mannion, capped by England at all age grades, spent six years at Birmingham City before earning a move to Manchester City. In 2021 she joined Manchester United but the centre half’s career was stalled by an ACL rupture last March, only reappearing in United colours in January. “Aoife Mannion was on our radar before she ruptured her ACL and has been playing games since her return,” said Pauw. “I have spoken to her coach [Marc Skinner] and he’s very happy that we invited her because she’s ready to get back to her old self. “This is the only moment that we can decide whether we go ahead with her or not.” Pauw also strengthened Ireland’s attacking midfield options by naming Washington Spirit’s Marissa Sheva (25) in the 26-woman squad to face Germany (non-capped) next Friday and China on February 23rd in Cadiz, Spain. A track star at Penn State University, Sheva brings fresh competition to the group, qualifying for an Irish passport via her Tyrone grandfather and Donegal grandmother. “Marissa came on the radar because she was already trying for three years to get her Irish passport and her whole heart is with Ireland,” Pauw explained. “We were a bit surprised because usually it’s the other way around and we go to them. We could help her get the passport in that final phase. She’s over the moon because her family is from here and this is a dream come true. “We had only seen her on video. This camp will be crucial for these players but we hope to create an environment that they’re free to perform. We will not put players in the squad unless they’re better than what we have.” New Shamrock Rovers signings Áine O’Gorman and Abbie Larkin are the only home based players named for the 10 day camp, heading to Marbella on Monday, with injuries ruling out Liverpool captain Niamh Fahey (calf), Savannah McCarthy (ACL), Chloe Mustaki (groin), Aoife Colvill (ACL) and Leanne Kiernan (ankle) while Ellen Molloy (knee) and Jess Ziu (ACL) will miss the World Cup. “It is virtually impossible for [Molloy and Ziu] to get there,” said Pauw. “Leanne will train at the end of March but that has already been in the paper.” Pauw must trim the final World Cup squad to 23 players before Ireland arrive in Sydney for the tournament opener against hosts Australia on July 20th. The Matildas also begin their build-up this month with a mini-tournament against the Czech Republic, Spain and Jamaica. [ Aviva pitch redevelopment denies Irish women historic first versus France ] The FAI also intend to secure a penultimate friendly on June 22nd, before the France match in Tallaght on July 6th, but the Aviva stadium remains unavailable due to pitch maintenance work ahead of two male rugby internationals in August and a money spinning American Football game between Notre dame and Navy. “We’ve done everything [to secure the Aviva],” said Pauw. “We’ve tried to discuss the maintenance schedule. It’s a shame. But we’re happy at Tallaght stadium. “This would have been a perfect moment because I think the send-off game, there’d be massive interest for it. Moving forward, we have not discussed that. “There’s also contracts involved so it is more than willing, because everybody wants us to improve and everybody wants us to succeed. It’s much more complicated than just a choice.” Republic of Ireland WNT Squad Goalkeepers: Courtney Brosnan (Everton), Megan Walsh (Brighton & Hove Albion), Grace Moloney (Reading), Naoisha McAloon (Durham WFC). Defenders: Harriet Scott (Birmingham City), Diane Caldwell (Reading), Louise Quinn (Birmingham City), Hayley Nolan (London City Lionesses), Claire Walsh (Glasgow City), Megan Campbell (Liverpool), Áine O’Gorman (Shamrock Rovers), Aoife Mannion (Manchester United). Midfielders: Katie McCabe (Arsenal), Denise O’Sullivan (North Carolina Courage), Megan Connolly (Brighton & Hove Albion), Ruesha Littlejohn (Aston Villa), Jamie Finn (Birmingham City), Lily Agg (London City Lionesses), Ciara Grant (Hearts), Lucy Quinn (Birmingham City), Isibeal Atkinson (West Ham United). Forwards: Amber Barrett (Potsdam Turbine), Heather Payne (Florida State University), Kyra Carusa (London City Lionesses), Abbie Larkin (Shamrock Rovers), Marissa Sheva (Washington Spirit). International Friendly China PR v Republic of Ireland Wednesday, February 22 KO 14:00 (13:00 Irish Time) Estadio Nuevo Mirador, Algeciras, Cadiz