Sir, – What Roger Cole of the Peace and Neutrality Alliance fails to call for in this letter (February 16th) is for a complete withdrawal of Russian forces from Ukraine which would lead to an end of hostilities. Mr Cole also claims that as a “neutral state” Ireland should be seeking a ceasefire and peace negotiations. As stated by then-taoiseach Micheál Martin in the Dáil last November, Ireland is “militarily non-aligned” but not “politically non-aligned” in this conflict. The conflict could end in a number of ways: a Russian withdrawal from Ukrainian territory, or the military defeat of Russian forces in Ukraine. Russia can choose which it will be. – Yours, etc, CONOR HOGARTY, Deansgrange, Blackrock, Co Dublin. A chara, – As the war in Ukraine approaches its first, terrible anniversary, the question must be asked: does the West want it to end? I would say no. For it is apparent that the US and its allies are intent on sustaining a war of attrition to keep Russia bogged down. The West’s strategy seems to be to provide just enough military support for Ukraine to continue its fight while assiduously avoiding escalation into an all-out war between Russia and the West. If this is so, it’s a highly dangerous gambit that may backfire, with consequences too terrible to even contemplate. Will the Government of neutral Ireland see fit to voice opposition to this reckless strategy and call for an end to the war? For surely no-one really doubts that this is what a majority of people in Ireland want. – Is mise, DOMINIC CARROLL, Ardfield, Co Cork. A chara, – The letter from the chair of the Peace and Neutrality Alliance, Roger Cole, calling for an immediate ceasefire in Ukraine, seems to suggest that a ceasefire and peace are the same thing. Leaving aside Mr Cole’s confusing defence of the so-called triple lock (which requires Ireland to seek the permission of openly fascist imperialist states like Russia before we can join peacekeeping missions), I must put these questions to Mr Cole. Russia has seized large swathes of Ukrainian territory since 2014. How much does Mr Cole think Russia should get to keep in exchange for agreeing to a ceasefire? Russia will never agree a ceasefire that involves returning the land it has seized. Separately, Russia has shown repeatedly that it does not respect ceasefires. Who should monitor and enforce any ceasefire, and what penalties should face Russia if it breaks the ceasefire to begin a new offensive? Finally, how does Mr Cole propose Ukraine be guaranteed protection from any further Russian aggression after a ceasefire? Russia has made a mockery of its previous treaties promising it would fully respect Ukraine’s post-USSR borders. If Mr Cole is unable to answer these questions, perhaps he should consider what exactly he is asking of Ukraine, and what a gift he would give to the Russians. When dealing with an invader who denies your very right to exist, there is no such thing as a ceasefire. There is only breathing space for the invader to rearm, refuel, and regroup, before resuming his invasion. Peace cannot co-exist with fascism, and a desperately naive pacifism which seeks to deny this reality only offers support to the enemies of peace. There is only one way out of this conflict which leads to a genuine, lasting peace in Europe: a clear Ukrainian victory. Any other outcome will entice the Russians to try again in the near future for even more land, and will lead directly back to war. We must fully back Ukraine, militarily and diplomatically, and stop offering support – direct or indirect – to the Russians. – Is mise, REBECCA CROWLEY, Cork.