FA Cup 5th Rd: Manchester United v West Ham Old Trafford, 7.45pm – Live on ITV & Premier Sports 1 Erik ten Hag has stated Manchester United still being in contention to win the Premier League, FA Cup, and Europa League will energise his side despite this meaning a maximum of 25 more matches. After United claimed the Carabao Cup on Sunday, they have West Ham’s visit on Wednesday in the FA Cup, before travelling to Liverpool for Sunday’s league fixture and host Real Betis in Thursday-week’s Europa League last-16 opening leg. Ten Hag pointed to when he was Ajax coach regarding why a packed schedule can inspire his team. “In my experience in Ajax, when we dropped out of Europe the levels went down and when you are in it gives energy,” said the manager. “Until now we have managed it quite well and I think we can do it also until the end of the season. Except Anthony Martial the availability from all the players is there. “First mentally, they are really ambitious; that is one thing and that gives energy. Second, we have the type of players who can handle the load, the physical load.” Playing the maximum 65 matches available to them this season would be one behind the club record set in 2008-09. Ten Hag also has no fears that complacency will occur after the Carabao Cup triumph. “The players have to take responsibility for that first – they have to take responsibility for their performance. But I can’t see that [a drop in levels]. It’s a trophy but it’s not the end of the season. What I have heard around me [since] and when I see the comments, when I see the fight in the dressingroom, it’s not like we are satisfied with this. We want to do better. That is quite clear. So it’s inspiring and it’s not the end – definitely not.” After Sunday’s win Fred and Wout Weghorst targeted a quadruple. “That is for fans,” Ten Hag said. “We have to focus on the next game and that is the only thing we are doing. We don’t have to talk about trophies. We have to talk about West Ham.” Fred and Luke Shaw are injury doubts for the FA Cup tie, while Ten Hag is unsure when Martial will recover from his hip injury. Of the timescale for the French forward’s return, the manager said: “I hope [before March’s international break] but I don’t give an expectation about that. Let him do his work. Several times now [he returns] then drops back too quickly. Give him the time. Of course I hope he’s on board but at this moment we’re doing really well with this set-up. When he is available then we have an extra option and a good option.” – Guardian