Sir, – In Brussels on Thursday – in response to questions about the return of Bertie Ahern to Fianna Fáil – Taoiseach Leo Varadkar said of the former’s evidence to the Mahon tribunal, “I think that that was at a particular moment in time” (News, February 9th). Indeed it was. So was every event from the beginning of time up to now. What was he trying to imply or hope that we would infer from his answer? Was it that talk of dig-outs or winnings on the horses was more acceptable as evidence then than it is now? Sometimes a no comment would be better than a meaningless one. – Yours, etc, SEAN O’BYRNE, Sallins, Co Kildare. Sir, – The root cause of a lot of the crises the country is facing stems from Bertie Ahern’s tenure, as did the electoral routing of Fianna Fáil. His party obviously has a death wish. – Yours, etc, KEITH NOLAN, Carrick-on-Shannon, Co Leitrim. Sir, – Tánaiste Micheál Martin seems to have forgotten the damning conclusions of the Mahon tribunal toward Mr Ahern’s evidence. To refresh his memory, the tribunal concluded that, “Much of the explanation provided by Mr Ahern as to the source of the substantial funds identified and inquired into in the course of the tribunal’s public hearings was deemed by the tribunal to be untrue”. – Yours, etc, JOHN COUGHLAN, Macroom, Co Cork. Sir, – Given that we are becoming a cashless society, I presume Fianna Fáil are still able to facilitate membership renewals to those without a functioning bank account? – Yours, etc, RORY E MacFLYNN, Blackrock, Co Dublin. Sir, – Bertie Ahern returns to Fianna Fáil in the same week that a remake of Fawlty Towers has been announced. A great week for humour. – Yours, etc, FRANK BYRNE, Dublin 9. Sir, – I note that in yesterday’s letters page (February 10th), there were letters about “protecting ancient monuments” and Bertie Ahern’s return to Fianna Fáil. Coincidence? I think not! – Yours, etc, NEVILLE SCARGILL, Bray, Co Wicklow. Sir, – Judging by the standing ovation he received at an event in Ballsbridge (News, February 10th) and looking at the accompanying picture, the former taoiseach seems to be already in canvassing mode! As the saying goes, “watch this space”. – Yours, etc, TADHG McCARTHY, Bray, Co Wicklow. Sir, – To complete Bertie Ahern’s rehabilitation, could he just tell us the name of the horse he won all the sterling on and the source of the tip? That is not too much to ask. – Yours, etc, BRIAN CULLEN, Rathfarnham, Dublin 16.