When is it, where is it on, who else is playing this weekend? Italy will play Ireland at 2.15pm at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome on Saturday, February 25th in the third game of the 2023 Six Nations. Wales then play England at the Principality Stadium in Cardiff at 4.45pm. On Sunday, France play Scotland at the Stade de France in Paris at 3pm Irish time. How can I watch it? The game is on free to air on Virgin Media One in Ireland. You can also watch the game on UTV. If you can’t be by a TV or want additional coverage, check out our live blogs on Irish Times Sport. [ Sign up for our new weekly rugby newsletter from Gerry Thornley ] What is the state of play in the table? Ireland are on top of the table by a narrow margin, having three better points difference than Scotland, level with them on 10 points. England are third on six points, France on five points, Italy on one point and Wales with no points. What happened in this fixture last year? Ireland gave Italy a hammering, rolling out 10 tries at the Aviva Stadium, Michael Lowry and James Lowe both got two each. Italy were limited to just two penalties as Ireland won 57-6. Nathan Johns writing at the time said: “The lopsided nature of Ireland’s 57-6 victory over Italy ensures that the main talking point can only really be the scrum law that forced the visitors to play the majority of the game with 13 men, killing off any hopes of a remotely close contest.” But the mood on Italy has changed? A close game against France and scoring tries against England in Twickenham have lifted hopes for Italy in this Six Nations. The Italians had victories over Wales and Australia in the Autumn Series and should provide Ireland more of a test this time around, especially at home. Watch out for Italy’s star fullback Ange Capuozzo. As Johnny Watterson writes: “For a sport that can sometimes be fixated by size, Capuozzo arrives from a long line of elusive runners told they were too small – Shane Williams, Cheslin Colbe and Christian Wade – a few who bucked the trend.” In nine caps, he has six tries. But the numbers “don’t account for the electrification of the Italian team and the wattage it gives out with their French Italian prowling the back field.” [ Italy’s Ange Capuozzo has the eye of an assassin - and presents a new challenge for all Six Nations teams ] Team news Cian Healy and Dan Sheehan are both included in the 37-man Ireland squad for the Six Nations game against Italy in Rome on Saturday having come through their individual hamstring rehab programmes. Joey Carbery is added to the squad to provide additional cover as Johnny Sexton continues his rehab this week. Caolin Blade, Gavin Coombes, Jordan Larmour, Jimmy O’Brien, Jamie Osborne, Cian Prendergast, Roman Salanoa and Jacob Stockdale return to the squad having played for their respective provinces in the URC at the weekend. Scott Penny and Kieran Treadwell have been added to the squad for the first time in this campaign. Treadwell featured against South Africa and Fiji in November while Penny played for Emerging Ireland against the Griquas and Pumas in Bloemfontein. Tadhg Beirne was last week ruled out of the remainder of the Championship and unfortunately Joe McCarthy will also miss the rest of this year’s campaign with an ankle issue. Keith Earls is unavailable this week with a calf issue while Jamison Gibson Park, Robbie Henshaw and Tadhg Furlong will all continue their respective rehab programmes. Rob Herring is continuing his graduated return to play protocols. Ireland squad Backs: Bundee Aki (Connacht), Caolin Blade (Connacht), Ross Byrne (Leinster), Joey Carbery (Munster), Craig Casey (Munster), Jack Crowley (Munster), Mack Hansen (Connacht), Hugo Keenan (Leinster), Jordan Larmour (Leinster), James Lowe (Leinster), Stuart McCloskey (Ulster), Conor Murray (Munster), Jimmy O’Brien (Leinster), Jamie Osborne (Leinster), Garry Ringrose (Leinster), Johnny Sexton (Leinster), Jacob Stockdale (Ulster). Forwards: Ryan Baird (Leinster), Finlay Bealham (Connacht), Jack Conan (Leinster), Gavin Coombes (Munster), Caelan Doris (Leinster), Cian Healy (Leinster), Iain Henderson (Ulster), Rob Herring (Ulster), Ronan Kelleher (Leinster), Dave Kilcoyne (Munster), Peter O’Mahony (Munster), Tom O’Toole (Ulster), Scott Penny (Leinster), Andrew Porter (Leinster), Cian Prendergast (Connacht), James Ryan (Leinster), Roman Salanoa (Munster), Dan Sheehan (Munster), Dan Sheehan (Leinster), Kieran Treadwell (Ulster), Josh van der Flier (Leinster).