Russia again pummelled Ukraine with a barrage of cruise and other missiles on Thursday, hitting targets from east to west. Ukrainian authorities said one of the strikes killed a woman (79) and injured at least seven other people. Russian forces used a variety of missile types, firing 36 in all in a two-hour overnight bombardment, said Ukraine’s military chief, Valery Zaluzhny. He said Ukrainian air defence batteries shot down 16 of them – a lower rate of success than against some previous Russian attacks. The head of Ukraine’s presidential office, Andriy Yermak, said Russian forces “changed their tactics” for the strike, deploying what he described as “active reconnaissance” and “false targets”. Russian forces may be seeking ways to get past Ukrainian air defences that have been strengthened by western-supplied weapons systems and have had high rates of success against previous Russian barrages of missiles and killer drones. A regional governor in western Ukraine, Maksym Kozitskyi, said a fire broke out at a “critical” infrastructure facility in the province of Lviv. He did not immediately offer details. The situation in Luhansk remained difficult, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s office said, without mentioning any retreats in eastern Ukraine. Russia is sending heavy equipment and mobilised troops into the Luhansk region but Ukrainian forces continue to defend the eastern Ukrainian region, its governor, Serhiy Haidai said. The Russian defence ministry claimed earlier its troops had broken through two fortified lines of Ukrainian defences on the eastern front of Luhansk. It said Ukrainian troops had retreated in the face of Russian attacks, but did not say in which part of the region. Mr Haidai said Russia’s claim that Ukrainian troops had pulled back “does not correspond to reality”. The head of Russia’s Wagner mercenary group has admitted that his mercenary group is facing difficulties in Ukraine. “The number of Wagner units will decrease, and we will also not be able to carry out the scope of tasks that we would like to,” Yevgeny Prigozhin said, amid growing evidence that his political influence in the Kremlin is waning. The UN general assembly will vote next week on a draft resolution stressing “the need to reach, as soon as possible, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace” in Ukraine, Reuters reports. The UN will, not for the first time, demand Moscow withdraw its troops and calls for a halt to hostilities. The vote will happen as Ukraine marks one year since Russia’s invasion. – Agencies