The 15-minute city is an urban-planning concept developed by Prof Carlos Moreno of the Sorbonne Business School that was quickly adopted by environmental thinkers and activists around the world. It’s basically just the notion that everyone should be able to have what they need – shops, schools, workplaces – within 15 minutes’ of their home (ideally by foot or bike) because this would be good for both the environment and for people’s quality of life. Because some people just call this “having a functional neighbourhood”. Many small Irish towns and suburbs already fit the criteria. And most town and city neighbourhoods across the world had it in the days before urban decline and food deserts, when people began driving long distances to huge shopping centres. Some people on the internet have decided that 15-minutes cities are actually a form of “climate lockdown” and that the shadowy elites who run everything will soon be keeping us within 15 minutes of our home, probably with military checkpoints. No, of course not! The 15-minute city idea is a long-term aspiration to add more services to neighbourhoods and plan cities better. Meanwhile, Low Traffic Neighbourhoods are being trialled in UK cities such as Oxford and this is seen as the beginnings of a conspiratorial 15-minute city master plan by some local and online rabble-rousers. Oxford has beome a magnet for protest. Some councillors have received death threats. But the truth is: there are no schemes where people will need permission to leave their neighbourhood. No one will be locked in their homes. No one will be tracked every time they leave the house, except, of course, by the phones with which they are posting conspiracy theories about 15-minute cities. Stop. Almost anything can be made sound sinister if you add evil things that aren’t happening into the mix. You like custard, right? Well, what if the shadowy elites were going to force you to eat nothing but custard for the rest of your life, at gunpoint, because it was Karl Marx’s favourite food. How would you feel then? [ Can the ‘15-minute city’ concept of urban living become a reality for Irish cities? ] [ Ireland well-suited for 15 minute cities, report finds ] Lots of people agree with you. Wide-eyed conspiracists from Canada to Ireland are all over social media discussing how our Ted-talking Davos-frequently overlords are planning to keep citizens in open-air prisons. GB News hosts have pontificated about it. Tory MP Nick Fletcher recently asked for a parliamentary debate on the “international socialist concept of so-called 15-minute cities”. He says too many women have been given starring roles in the Star Wars franchise. That’s why there’s so much crime, he says. He has taken a really strong position on this. You live in Ranelagh. It’s filled with shops. You already live in a 15-minute city. I feel like this explainer has backfired.