Republic of Ireland 0 China 0 Damp squib in Cádiz. Not to worry, exciting days ahead as Denise O’Sullivan’s 100th cap for the Republic of Ireland will allow her to avoid another lost day in airports, after the FAI secured World Cup warm-ups against the USA in Austin, Texas on April 8th and in St Louis, Missouri on April 11th. O’Sullivan was recently named North Carolina captain, confirming that her status in US soccer far outweighs her name recognition at home. It does not come much bigger than facing the current world champions on their home turf and twice in three days will put enormous strain on Vera Pauw’s squad simply to remain competitive. [ Republic of Ireland 0 China 0: As it happened ] It does not come much smaller than Ireland versus China in front of 30 people, including former Dublin football manager Paul ‘Pillar’ Caffrey, following a 10-day training camp in Marbella, but some harsh lessons were dished out. O’Sullivan played like she is mired in preseason. Because she is. The NWSL campaign does not start for another month. Others cannot use the same excuse. Pauw signalled beforehand that this was a trial for the new Irish trio, with most of the focus on how Aoife Mannion and Deborah-Anne De La Harpe coped down the right side of defence. Philadelphia native Marissa Sheva impressed off the bench but De La Harpe had a jittery introduction to international football while Mannion was calm in possession and besides one sloppy pass, the Manchester United centre back dovetailed with Lou Quinn and Megan Connolly. Connolly, it must be argued, would better serve the team in her natural midfield position as she struggled in possession. She was not alone as every ball sent up to Heather Payne in the opening 45 minutes became a Chinese counterattack. Ireland adopted a more attacking 3-4-2-1 shape in possession with Katie McCabe and 17-year-old Abbie Larkin playing off Payne, before reverting to 5-4-1 when China came at them. “Transition, transition!” was the constant demand but O’Sullivan and Lily Agg were outnumbered in the middle third and overrun by China, who lacked the necessary accuracy to hurt Ireland. Still, Courtney Brosnan needed to make two rudimentary saves from Yao Lingwei and Lou Ziahui to ensure Ireland avoided defeat. None of this will suffice against the US, never mind World Cup hosts Australia in the tournament opener on July 20th. “I hope you can see that we have been trying,” said Pauw before a daunting return to Texas in April, where she is not allowed coach due to sanctions handed down by US Soccer. “A little bit earlier occupation higher up the pitch, in the pockets with angles; a little bit higher pace of passing, to give each other time; a little bit of anticipation to be alert to what is happening, that can bring us higher up the pitch to create chances. “These are the Asian champions. When you start to play out then you need to have the guts, you need to dare to be excellent. We knew it would not be perfect because this is the first time that we have really emphasised our attacking game.” As the Irish players struggled in the heat – the stadium has the Rock of Gibraltar as a picturesque backdrop – McCabe tore off her left boot and demanded medical attention, giving everyone a much needed water break 10 minutes before half-time. In a game that was supposed to unveil new methods of scoring, the only goal chance came from a McCabe corner to the back post where Quinn smashed a header off the crossbar. That aside, the attack remains heavily dependent on Megan Campbell’s long throw. De La Harpe did not reappear for the second half, as Áine O’Gorman reprised her role at right wing back, while Philadelphia native Sheva replaced Larkin and Agg made way for Ruesha Littlejohn. But the system remained the same and so did the disjointed nature of the contest, although Sheva’s pace was a boon. An error by Campbell gifted Chinese substitute Zhang Lin Yan the best chance of the game, forcing an intervention from Quinn’s long limb. Xao Yuyi had the ball in Brosnan’s net on the hour mark but it was ruled out for offside. Mannion had a similar feeling moments later, as Xu Huan appeared to score an own goal, only for referee Jason Lee Barcelo to penalise the defender on debut. Not to worry. The rare sight of Pauw giving Mannion a hug, when she was replaced by Diane Caldwell, suggests that the 27-year-old Brummie has secured a business class plane ticket to Australia this summer. Next stop Austin, Texas. REPUBLIC OF IRELAND: Brosnan; Mannion (Caldwell, 69), L Quinn, Connolly; De La Harpe (O’Gorman, h-t), O’Sullivan, Agg (Littlejohn, h-t), Campbell; McCabe, Payne (Carusa, 75), Larkin (Sheva, h-t). CHINA: Huan; Qiaozhu, Linlin, Xiaoxue, Mengwen; Xin, Rui, Lingwei, Yuyi; Shanshan (Lin Yan, h-t), Jiahui. Referee: Jason Lee Barcelo (Gibraltar).