Sir, – I congratulate Justine McCarthy on her excellent article, she hits the nail on the head (“Our young people are fleeing a self-satisfied and hypocritical Ireland”, Opinion & Analysis, February 17th). We watch in despair as our talented young people depart this island in their droves. We left Ireland in the 1980s and returned 20 years ago to raise our sons. One has left the country, having determined that he couldn’t afford a decent quality of life here, and the other has experienced the decimation of his friend group by emigration. How careless of our Government to squander our precious young. We are becoming an exporter of talented people, who are eagerly sought by recipient countries. We have yet to hear any meaningful ideas from our political leaders about how they are planning to stem this flow. We need to start demonstrating a vision for this country that encourages hope. A wealthy country such as ours deserves the services, housing and infrastructure that we can be proud of and in which our young can see a future for themselves. The idea of a “minister for future generations” has been mooted and needs to be taken seriously. A citizens’ assembly to address the deficits in our country from the point of view of the young would be a good start. – Yours, etc, AILBHE MURRAY, Cabinteely, Co Dublin. Sir, – Justine McCarthy writes about “the realisation that there are Irish migrants who are not being wrenched from their beloved homeland by necessity or even as a lifestyle choice... but because they have fallen out of love with their country”. I couldn’t disagree more. Young people are leaving Ireland for better lifestyle and career choices, not because of any change in attitudes towards immigrants, asylum seekers or the hypocrisy of the few. It is about realism in affordability of housing and better working conditions. The grass is always greener for the young but they will always love the auld sod! – Yours, etc, AIDAN RODDY, Cabinteely, Dublin 18. Sir, – Describing a young Irish emigrant to Australia, Justine McCarthy laments the loss to Ireland of one of our young people moving to Bondi beach seeking a more affordable lifestyle. The situation may not be much better there, however. The average salary there is about $108,000 (€69,000), average house price more than $1.4 million and apartment prices about $750,000. That is for the city of Sydney with premium areas like Bondi tending to be higher. It’s a better life but affordable living it is not. – Yours, etc, BRIAN O’BRIEN, Kinsale, Co Cork.