Secondrow Kieran Treadwell and flanker Scott Penny, in his first full call up, have been added to the Irish squad for Saturday’s clash with Italy in Rome. But once again outhalf Joey Carbery’s recall will lead to further deliberation over the readiness of Irish captain Johnny Sexton. Ireland announced a 37-man-squad for round three of the Six Nations Championship as they prepare to head for Italy hoping to make it three wins from three matches. According to an IRFU statement Carbery is added to the squad “to provide additional cover as Sexton continues his rehab this week”. The Irish outhalf left the pitch in the second half of Ireland’s game against France, when he was replaced by Leinster team-mate Ross Byrne after 49 minutes. [ Sign up for our new weekly rugby newsletter from Gerry Thornley ] Treadwell comes in for 21-year-old Joe McCarthy, who has been ruled out for the rest of the Six Nations campaign with an ankle injury, while Tadhg Beirne is also sidelined until around May. The Munster secondrow hobbled off against France, also with an ankle injury, and underwent corrective surgery. Treadwell featured against South Africa and Fiji in the November, while Penny played for the Emerging Ireland side against the Griquas and Pumas in Bloemfontein. Loosehead prop Cian Healy and hooker Dan Sheehan are also included having been left out of the Irish squad that beat France in Aviva last time out. Both players have come through their individual hamstring rehabilitation programmes. Sheehan’s return to fitness means Tom Stewart returns to Ulster. The 22-year-old, who has scored seven tries in 11 appearances for Ulster this season, was initially called up as cover in what has been a quick rotation of hookers in recent weeks. Rónan Kelleher returned to play after 26 minutes against France when Rob Herring departed after a tackle from Uini Atonio, which earned the French frontrow a yellow card on the day but subsequently a three-week ban from the match citing official. The game is just too early for a number of other names who would have expected to feature against Italy and will hope to be fit for Andy Farrell’s World Cup plans later this year in France. Keith Earls is unavailable with a calf issue while scrumhalf Jamison Gibson-Park, centre Robbie Henshaw and prop Tadhg Furlong will all continue their respective rehab programmes. Herring is also continuing with graduated return to play protocols following the Atonio tackle. Irish backrow Peter O’Mahony has signed a one-year extension to his IRFU contract. The 33-year-old, who made his Irish debut against Italy in 2012, is on course to become another Irish centurion following his long time Munster team-mate Conor Murray, who hit 100 caps last November against South Africa. Ireland has three players on the current squad with more than 100 caps, Murray (102), Sexton (111) and Healy (121), while Leinster centre Garry Ringrose is set to win his 50th cap against Italy of selected. O’Mahony currently has 91 caps as well as Six Nations Championship titles with Ireland in 2014 and 2015, a Grand Slam in 2018 and a Triple Crown in 2022. “Peter has been an important figure in Irish rugby for over a decade and has contributed massively to the success the Ireland men’s team has enjoyed across that period,” said David Nucifora, the IRFU’s performance director. “He is a born leader and galvanises those around him. We are delighted to contract him through the World Cup and into the 2023/24 season. A leader like Pete is invaluable to both Ireland and Munster.” Backs: Bundee Aki (Connacht), Caolin Blade (Connacht), Ross Byrne (Leinster), Joey Carbery (Munster), Craig Casey (Munster), Jack Crowley (Munster), Mack Hansen (Connacht), Hugo Keenan (Leinster), Jordan Larmour (Leinster), James Lowe (Leinster), Stuart McCloskey (Ulster), Conor Murray (Munster), Jimmy O’Brien (Leinster), Jamie Osborne (Leinster), Garry Ringrose (Leinster), Johnny Sexton (Leinster), Jacob Stockdale (Ulster). Forwards: Ryan Baird (Leinster), Finlay Bealham (Connacht), Jack Conan (Leinster), Gavin Coombes (Munster), Caelan Doris (Leinster), Cian Healy (Leinster), Iain Henderson (Ulster), Rob Herring (Ulster), Ronan Kelleher (Leinster), Dave Kilcoyne (Munster), Peter O’Mahony (Munster), Tom O’Toole (Ulster), Scott Penny (Leinster), Andrew Porter (Leinster), Cian Prendergast (Connacht), James Ryan (Leinster), Roman Salanoa (Munster), Dan Sheehan (Munster), Dan Sheehan (Leinster), Kieran Treadwell (Ulster), Josh van der Flier (Leinster).