Scotland 35 Wales 7 Scotland’s Finn Russell was at his creative best in a crushing bonus-point win over Wales in the Six Nations at Murrayfield, a record victory in the contest. It was also the first time since 1996 that Scotland had won their opening two matches in the competition. Hooker George Turner, replacement fullback Blair Kinghorn and number eight Matt Fagerson added to a brace from wing Kyle Steyn as Scotland ensured it would not be a third year running in which they beat England in the opener but then lost to Wales. The Welsh dominated territory in the first half but their numerous visits to the Scotland 22 failed to provide points with their only try in the game via hooker and captain Ken Owens. [ Did the gap between France and Ireland just get wider? ] Scotland are second in the Six Nations table with 10 points from their two games, only behind Ireland on points difference, while Wales have yet to break their duck as the return of coach Warren Gatland has failed to change their fortunes so far. It was a first win for the Scots over Wales in Edinburgh since 2017, having lost five of the previous six meetings at all venues, and beat their previous record winning margin of 25 points set 99 years ago in 1924. “It was a great game and a great result,” Russell said at the post-match presentation. “We knew we had struggled to back up the first game (in the past). I was just doing my job out there, making the other boys look good. “You can see the continuity in the squad, the boys are on the same page and that helped us attack like we did today. The defence also shut them out so a good performance all round.” It was the second week in a row that Wales started slowly in the opening 20 minutes and they again struggled on their own lineout, adding to the mounting list of concerns for Gatland. After two Russell penalties, Scotland scored their opening try as Turner burst clear from a driving maul and showed good strength to get the ball down under pressure from two defenders. [ Ireland’s grand ambition remains as France put to the sword in thriller ] Wales had 70 per cent of the territory in the first half and stayed in the game as Owens barged over from a driving maul. They trailed 13-7 at the break, with wing Rio Dyer dropping the ball with the tryline gaping on the stoke of halftime. Scotland turned up the heat in the second period with Russell taking charge as he controlled the game. He laid on two tries for Steyn, first with a brilliant offload in the tackle and then an intelligent cross-field kick that was perfect for the wing to dot down. Russell had a hand in the next two scores as well, another kick providing the attacking impetus for Kinghorn to go over before his long, looping pass was perfect for Fagerson to run onto and score. “We had a lot of changes in the pack and the boys showed the potential of where we want to go,” an upbeat Owens said. “We had a good first-half performance, delivered everything we spoke about. Second half we had back-to-back errors and put pressure on ourselves. It allowed them to come at us. “It is early days with a new coaching staff and new players coming in. Hopefully we can turn the corner against England (on Feb. 25). We believe in what we are trying to achieve.”