Yeeros has had quite the following since it opened in Glasnevin/Drumcondra, in north Dublin, in 2018, and it has now crossed the River Liffey to open a second outlet, on Wexford Street. It specialises in fresh gyros with flame-grilled meats in wraps, savoury bites, salads and Greek pastries. Most of the ingredients are imported directly from Greece for an authentic taste. The savoury snacks and pastries are made in a central kitchen and delivered to the two outlets each day. A Yeeros sharing plate, a skepasti beef lamb gyro, a Greek-style sis kebab pita pot, and one baklava. If you’re in the northside catchment area, order on their website or their app. Southside orders are through Deliveroo. The website is clear and easy to navigate, delivery was impressively speedy and everything arrived hot and in good shape. The smartly branded packaging is robust. The sharing plate had an assortment of savoury snacks, crunchy falafel, deep-fried fritters and stuffed pastries, which were mostly filled with mild cheese. They were tasty enough bites, although the dolmadakia, the stuffed vine leaf, was a shade on the mushy side. The skepasti beef lamb gyro, which is only available in Wexford Street, is like a very substantial Greek club sandwich, with the bread cut into quarters and filled with grilled meat, mayo-mustard sauce, salad, melted cheddar cheese and curly chips on the side. The sis kebab pita pot is good value: a bowl-shaped pitta is filled with flame-grilled pork and chicken gyros with tzatziki, tomato, red onion and chips. The flaky, honey-soaked baklava is layered with pistachios and walnuts. €41.30 for dinner for three people – A Yeeros sharing plate, a skepasti beef lamb gyro, a Greek style sis kebab pita pot; and one baklava. Delivery is through Deliveroo. On the northside, you can order through the app and website to a 5km radius. For Wexford Street, both order and delivery are through Deliveroo, with a radius of 6km. Open daily. I’d be going back for the sis kebab pita pot, which was the tastiest and offers the best value. The skepasti is huge, most definitely for two people.