There was a moment when I was hanging off the side of a mountain that I realised how good the graphics in the new PlayStation VR2 are. Staring down to the valley floor kicked my fear of heights into gear: the stomach lurch, the slight head spin, the overwhelming urge to sit down and not move for a few minutes. But then my brain took over and reminded me that I was in a virtual world, where it is perfectly safe to swing around rocky outcrops and wooden towers over sheer drops. Virtual reality hasn’t gone away, despite the initial enthusiasm waning a little. Meta is still pushing the Quest headsets, offering a more expensively priced Pro option to users, while HTC has a new-generation Vive device on the way. Meanwhile, the speculation around Apple and its potential VR and augmented reality headset continues. So it is against that background that Sony’s second-generation virtual reality headset makes its debut on the market. There are some things that you might like to change – it’s still cabled – but if you already own a PS5 and want to get into VR gaming, the PSVR2 is your best bet. It’s not cheap, at €600, which is a fair chunk of change to invest, but not only is it a step above the original PlayStation VR, it is one of the better ones I’ve tried recently. One note: this review was carried out with pre-launch access. There may be some changes to the software for the retail units. So what are the main differences between the original VR unit and the PSVR2? There are a few. Although both headsets have the same OLED technology and refresh rate, at 90Hz and 120Hz, the updated version has a higher resolution, at 2000x2040 per eye versus the original 960x1080 resolution. The second-gen hardware has a wider field of vision – 110 degrees versus 100 – and it now has embedded cameras rather than relying on the PlayStation Camera as an external add-on. It has eye tracking too, which works well. The overall effect is impressive. The graphics are, as promised, immersive. The launch titles – Horizon Call of the Mountain, Moss – transport you into a virtual world that is vibrant and vivid, yet still feels realistic. In Moss, the opening sequence of a library pulls you in so much it was a shock when I leaned backwards and felt the sofa instead of a wooden bench. Sony has done some work on the interface too. The new headset has vibration feedback, which was missing from the first generation of the hardware. It’s a subtle rumble rather than face-melting vibrations. While it might not seem like something you need for a VR headset, it works surprisingly well. Team it with the feedback from the new, dedicated Sense controllers, and the overall experience is a positive one. One of the best changes is that the PSVR2 is far easier to set up than its predecessor. The original came with multiple cables and boxes that had to be connected to the console, and it took time; the PSVR2 needs a single USB-C cable to connect the headset to the PS5. It’s a few seconds instead of minutes trying to decipher which cable goes where. Mapping the room took the longest, although you can set up a temporary play area if something changes in the room – furniture is moved, for example. You’ll need a good bit of light in the toom too, or else the system will keep cutting in on your game to tell you that it can’t track adequately. The OLED panels teamed with the graphics power of the PS5 makes for a compelling combo. The graphics are sharp, although not quite as sharp as your 4K TV or your smartphone, and, teamed with the in-ear buds, you can forget you aren’t in the virtual world. You can choose between seated or standing VR, and even though it is cabled, which can limit your movement a little, the cable is long enough to allow you to move in a decent-sized room. It is also easier to get a good fit. The lenses can be adjusted, which wasn’t possible with the previous version. The scope can be pulled away from your face to get a comfortable fit, even with glasses, and the rubber gasket seals out the light effectively. It is about 40g lighter than its predecessor too, which means it feels a bit more comfortable on your head if you are wearing the headset for a long time. The PSVR2 still suffers from the same limitations as other headsets – it’s possible that you may suffer from motion sickness. There were more than a few moments of nausea before I got acclimatised. It’s also not cheap. Nor should it necessarily be an inexpensive buy but, at €600, it’s more expensive than the basic PlayStation 5 console. And it’s not guaranteed to be backwards compatible, so if you had VR-enabled games for the original PSVR, you can’t necessarily play them on the new device. That means you’ll be shelling out for new games as well as the PSVR2 headset – and that will add up to a lot of money for players. Speaking of games, there aren’t as many exclusives as you’d like at launch, though that may change over time. Aside from the lack of out-of-the-box backwards compatibility with older VR games, this headset is only compatible with the PS5, so PS4 owners will have to stick with the original headset. The pass-through camera will allow you to see what is going on outside the headset, but it is in black-and-white, and not necessarily the clearest at times. While you are playing, though, what you see is displayed on your TV so everyone else can see exactly what you are up to. An excellent introduction to the world of VR. If you can afford it, that is.