The Sinn Féin president Mary Lou McDonald said it was “clear now that significant progress has been made” following her meeting with British prime minister Rishi Sunak. Ms McDonald said it was essential a deal is concluded quickly. “We now want to see a speedy conclusion of matters,” she said, “and above all else, we want to see the institutions restored. “But it seems to us that it’s very much game on and we’re very heartened by that. “We’re very very conscious that a deal can be done [and] should now be concluded speedily.” Earlier Alliance Party leader Naomi Long cautioned a deal was “not over the line yet” following her meeting with the UK prime minister. Ms Long told reporters “things are gradually moving in the direction of a potential deal. But we are not over the line yet, she said. “That doesn’t mean that we won’t be very soon, but there’s clearly some heavy lifting still to be done.” Mr Sunak, is in Belfast for meetings amid increased speculation that a deal on the Northern Ireland protocol is imminent. Mr Sunak left the Belfast hotel where he has been meeting the Northern parties just after 12.30pm. He and the Northern Secretary, Chris Heaton-Harris, will meet the North’s five largest political parties on Friday morning. The UUP leader Doug Beattie indicated a deal may not be reached in the next few days but the prime minister was confident that the deal would be one “that unionism can accept”. “We could have something next week, but it may be another couple of weeks yet,” Mr Beattie told reporters. “We don’t know, and I don’t leave here knowing much more than I knew when we first went in, but certainly the prime minister was enthusiastic, engaged and positive.” He said the prime minister’s words were that “there’s a way to go yet” and that told him “the deal has not been finalised.” He added “things are moving in the right direction, he’s confident that when he puts something on the table which he thinks is a deal that will work for everybody in Northern Ireland it will be a deal that unionism can accept.” The SDLP leader, Colum Eastwood, said there was “no white smoke yet” but they had had a “good, positive meeting” with the Prime Minister. He said the detail given by Mr Sunak was “scant” and they had “talked around some of the issues” but a deal was “not done yet”. “I think we’ll know a lot more in the next couple of days,” Mr Eastwood said. “I think he’s very careful not to get into too much detail until the deal is done.” The SDLP leader said there would be a “moment very soon where people have to make a decision and I would argue, as I’ve said before, it’s time to take yes for an answer for the DUP.” It was “fundamental” that Northern Ireland was not separated legally from the rest of the United Kingdom, DUP MP Sammy Wilson said on Friday. Mr Wilson said he wanted to hear what steps any deal on the Northern Ireland protocol had taken to remove the “automatic application of EU law”. He told BBC Radio 4′s Today programme said: “What we want to hear most importantly is where the negotiations have reached in removing the automatic application of EU law to Northern Ireland without any democratic input from the representatives in Northern Ireland and without any ability to change those laws if they are detrimental to Northern Ireland. “We’ve been, quite frankly, abandoned to the EU ruling Northern Ireland through the imposition of single market rules.” Asked how keen he is to find a way through and find a way back into powersharing, and if the DUP is in a no or a “let’s find a way through this mode”, Mr Wilson said: “We are very much in a let’s find a way through this mode, because we want to have the powersharing arrangements restored in Northern Ireland. “We want to be in a problem-solving mode, but the problem is not caused by us. The problem is caused by the application of the protocol ... part of which we believe are unnecessary and the government has said should be changed.” He added: “The government was prepared to, at the end of last year, unilaterally change the protocol to deal with this particular issue and I hope that they are still in that mood, and we will only find out once we see the details of the deal.” Mr Wilson was asked if there is a system they would accept that involves oversight from the European Court of Justice. “If the issue of being part of the single market rules and single market laws is removed from Northern Ireland, then there’s no need for the European Court of Justice,” he said. Asked if that is what he is calling for, he said: “It would ensure that Brexit actually applied to Northern Ireland, it would ensure that the UK government had sovereignty over this part of the United Kingdom and that Northern Ireland was not separated legally from the rest of the United Kingdom as a result of the protocol. Former taoiseach Bertie Ahern has said he does not think negotiations will be “wrapped up” before the 25th anniversary. Speaking on Newstalk’s Pat Kenny show, Mr Ahern said that discussions were “getting near the end game.” “I’m delighted Rishi Sunak is in the North today because one of the fears was that the parties felt they hadn’t been briefed, they hadn’t been given the details and they had several questions.” Senior Irish Government sources were cautious on the timing of any announcement on a protocol deal but acknowledged that Dublin had been in close contact with the European Commission and that an agreement was expected. Officials said that they had not seen a legal text yet. The momentum towards a deal is clearly growing. EU ambassadors have been called to a meeting with EU chief negotiator Maroš Šefčovič in Brussels on Friday, after Mr Šefčovič meets the British foreign secretary James Cleverly and the Northern Ireland Secretary Chris Heaton-Harris. It is expected that Mr Sunak will seek to gain support for any agreement on the protocol but there were no signs that the DUP will soften its position. Former deputy leader Nigel Dodds, who now sits in the House of Lords, told a European newspaper that any checks on goods or role for the European Court of Justice (ECJ) would mean that the DUP would reject the deal and continue to boycott Stormont. It is widely expected that the agreement will eliminate the vast majority of checks on goods entering Northern Ireland from Great Britain by using a system of red and green lanes, with the green lane – where there will be no checks – reserved for goods which are only intended for the North. However, the EU will have some oversight on this system, and the ECJ is expected to retain some jurisdiction over the protocol. The original text of the agreement is not expected to change, sources said. “The negotiations are finding solutions,” said one senior Irish Government source. “The work isn’t concluded but it’s well-advanced.” – Additional reporting agencies