Finland’s Sami Valimaki and Denmark’s Martin Simonsen share the lead after an opening day of low scoring in the Thailand Classic on the DP World Tour. Valimaki carded eight birdies in a flawless 64 while Simonsen recorded an eagle, seven birdies and a solitary bogey as 82 of the 132-strong field broke par at Amata Spring Country Club. “It’s a great day,” Simonsen said. “I thought it was going to be difficult out there with the wind and it was, but thankfully I played the par fives really well, which helped. “Most of them were downwind, so that helped a lot, but you still have to hit the shots. “I haven’t played the way I’ve scored the last two weeks, so it’s been very, very frustrating for me. I feel like I’ve been playing better than what the scores have said. I’ll just keep doing what I’m doing and eventually it’ll be okay.” Simonsen and Valimaki enjoyed a one-shot lead over German duo Alexander Knappe and Yannik Paul, with home favourite Kiradech Aphibarnrat three shots further back after carding six birdies and a double bogey on the 14th. Scotland’s Robert MacIntyre was also part of the large group on four under par after finding a solution to his recent putting issues. “The last four weeks have been tough on the greens,” the left-hander said. “I’ve done a bit of work on Tuesday and realised it was more mental, not technique. “It was about freeing myself and that’s what I’ve done. I’ve changed my pre-shot routine a touch and just trusted my instincts and what I do best, that’s putting a good stroke on it and hoping it goes in. “I’m driving it well. I’ve really just been waiting on the putter to turn up the last few weeks. Hopefully today is a good sign.” John Murphy was the best of the three Irish players competing, shooting a two-under 70 on the opening day. Tom McKibbin and Gary Hurley were a shot further back on one under after 71s. Meanwhile, world number one Lydia Ko made a flying start in her bid to regain the Aramco Saudi Ladies International title in Jeddah. Ko, who won the event in 2021 but did not defend her title last year, carded eight birdies in a flawless opening 64 at Royal Greens Golf and Country Club to share the lead with Thailand’s Pajaree Anannarukarn. “I knew that today was the day to take advantage of the calmer conditions,” said Ko, who got married in South Korea at the end of December. “At this time of the year and with the forecast, it’s only going to be stronger and probably some of the strongest winds I’ve seen out here. “I knew with some of the pin positions I needed to be a little bit more aggressive. Most of the opportunities I had I was able to take advantage of that, it was that kind of a day and a nice start to the season. “It’s cool to see I have an officially under-par round as a Mrs.” The leading duo enjoyed a one-shot advantage over Atthaya Thitikul, Aditi Ashok and Jung Min Hong, with defending champion Georgia Hall six strokes off the pace following an opening 70. Ireland’s Leona Maguire was two under after three holes of her opening round but could only find one more birdie to go with three bogeys as she opened with a one-under 71 to sit in a share of 40th position. The tournament has enjoyed a five-fold increase in prize money to $5 million (€4.7 million) to match the purse offered in the men’s PIF Saudi International.