A holiday can mean different things to different people. Some want nothing more than to “fly and flop” and spend their entire break lying in the sun, while others want to explore the locality; some head away for the nightlife, while others want to do the complete opposite and spend their holiday focusing on their fitness routine or hobby. At this time of year, the Canary Islands are the perfect destination for people who want to do a little bit of everything. For anyone keen to factor a daily workout into their holiday plans, Lanzarote, in particular, is the obvious choice. A mecca for cycling enthusiasts, the rugged island landscape offers the ideal terrain for biking, and the almost constant sunshine means inclement weather will never put athletes off their game. The recently opened Lanzarote Active Resort is an amalgamation of two hotels in the Teguise Beach area of the island. Aimed at active (as well as inactive) holidaymakers, there is a smorgasbord of activities on offer, from cycling and diving for those who want to explore above and below land, and everything from yoga and body challenge classes to altitude training and swimming in the 10-lane Olympic-sized swimming pool. I would never be described as athletic, but I do enjoy daily power walks, yoga, exercise classes and an occasional swim. My other half is a keen swimmer (both indoor and outdoor) all year round, so there would be plenty to keep us occupied at the resort in late winter. Checking in at reception, we were offered a glass of fizz or an orange juice while waiting to be fitted with a wrist band (its colour denoting what level of all-inclusiveness we were entitled to), and informed of the times of my pre-booked classes and spa treatments over the coming days. After checking out our plush room with a sea and pool view, it was time to decide on our first activity. We started slowly (after lunch) with a power walk along the promenade, which took us around the headland and with the (very welcome) afternoon sun on our faces and the wind at our backs, did a 90-minute round-trip before heading back to the hotel to try out the leisure facilities. The all-inclusive package, which (depending on your room rate) is spread across the two hotels, offers plenty of choice for dining out and enjoying a sun downer or two. With fitness enthusiasts in mind, the buffet restaurants offer plenty of healthy options including fresh fish, paella and a variety of salads (as well as more calorific dishes for those looking for a bit of self-indulgence). Alongside the hard-to-resist desserts, there is also a colourful array of fresh fruit to finish. There are also a number of a-la-carte options on site, including Koi, an Asian restaurant offering sushi and “aged cow”, which diners cook themselves at their on-table hotplate. Waking up to the sunshine is very energising, especially at this time of year, so from day one I participated in an early morning beach-facing yoga class, the perfect way to start the day. As all in sundry seemed to be geared up for cycling, I decided I should have a go, but rather than trying to keep up with the experienced cyclists (many who bring their own bikes and gear), I hired a bicycle from the on-site “cycling station” and spent a pleasantly energetic couple of hours following the abundance of cycling tracks in the locality. Back at the hotel, there are classes of varying degrees of difficulty and effort taking place every hour throughout the day, with a timetable displayed on a digital menu. Over the course of the four-day stay, I participated in several, while my other half made great use of the 50m swimming pool (often sharing lanes with teams of athletes on training trips to Lanzarote). No active trip would be complete without taking the time to relax and unwind, so I made sure to visit the wellness centre for a relaxing full body massage with Lanzarote salt and an in-depth facial. For anyone wanting to do more on holiday than just reading by the pool (though there were plenty of people doing just that too), while enjoying good food, a bit of nightlife and some glorious sunshine, this was just the place. Prices from €120 per room per night, barcelo.com Pine Cliffs Resort in Portugal’s Algarve has just launched a new Insanity boot camp for those looking for a challenge in 2023. Inspired by military training, the programme includes intensive workouts “to build strength, endurance and agility”. To ease the pain somewhat, sessions take place either on the beach or under the pine trees, which give the resort its name. Available all year round, the three, five or seven night retreats come with a full board meal plan designed by a nutritionist, and guests can also benefit from a physical assessment, personal training, spa treatments and massages as well as access to the Serenity Spa Thermal Oasis with steam room, hydrotherapy pool, outdoor Jacuzzi, indoor and outdoor swimming pools and relaxation areas. From €788 per person, pinecliffs.com If golfing, swimming and walking followed by mental and spiritual strengthening sounds like your sort of active break, then The Residence Tunis in Tunisia could be just the ticket. Located on the shores of the Mediterranean, the resort offers a world class 18 hole golf course, two swimming pools, Thalasso Spa and fitness centre, and its own private beach. As well as honing their physical fitness, guests can also avail of a four- or seven-night Yoga and Mindfulness holiday with a combination of personalised yoga sessions, meditation and traditional rituals to rejuvenate body and mind. From €193 per night, cenizaro.com Tenerife is another great Canary Island destination for sunshine during colder months and outdoor activity. The Barcelo Tenerife is located within the dramatic volcanic landscape of San Blas Nature Reserve, and offers a variety of activities including mountain biking, Nordic walking tours and guided hiking. Those who prefer exercising on water can enjoy floating yoga classes, kayaking and stand-up paddle boarding. And once the sun has gone down, there is also the option of taking part in a stargazing tour led by the hotel’s resident astrologer. From €142 per room, barcelo.com Adrenalin junkies with a bigger budget can fill their boots with a trip to Kenya. A 10-night trip involves a safari to the open plains of the Masai Mara Reserve to look for the “Big Five”, the “Small Five” and some incredible bird species. Wildlife can also be spotted at night with a camel or horse ride through the parks under the star-filled sky. And if water-based activities are more of an attraction, deep sea fishing and kite surfing are also on offer. From €9,300 per person including accommodation, meals, transfers and excursions, andbeyond.com