A further member of the charity Goal’s aid team in Syria has been found dead in the northwest the country. The charity has now confirmed the deaths of a total of 27 of its workers in the region since an earthquake hit earlier this week. There are fears the death toll could rise further. As the number of casualties in the region continues to rise in the southeast provinces of Turkey and neighbouring northwest Syria, more than18,000 people have been confirmed dead by Turkish authorities. More than 74,000 people are wounded and thousands more remain under the rubble. In Northwest Syria, more than 2,000 people have been confirmed dead, and over 2,950 are injured. Many more are trapped under the rubble. The earthquakes caused human and material losses in 10 provinces, and over 13 million people were affected. The charity which has been operating in northwest Syria since 2012 and in Turkey since 2016 said it is still trying to account for all its workers in the region, but as of lunchtime on Friday some were still missing. Tánaiste and Minister for Foreign Affairs Micheál Martin TD has expressed his condolences to staff at the aid agency. Mary Van Lieshout, the charity’s deputy CEO said many of its workers were woken in the middle of the night when the earthquake hit, she explained. “As we understand it, now 6,000 buildings have collapsed across Turkey and 2,000 in Syria. So for us in Goal, much of the week has been spent trying to really understand, to secure knowledge about where our colleagues were, to account for all of them,” she said. In northwest Syria, at least 60,000 people have been left without shelter and have very little access to services and assistance. Goal said its staff were regrouping where they are able to do so, and were starting to deliver flour to bakeries it supports in Idleb and northern Aleppo. But it said humanitarian needs were very high with the earthquake affecting people already displaced because of conflict.. The charity said its current priority in northwest Syria was to ensure that staff are safe and protected. The spokeswoman said in addition to medical aid, tents and other shelter items, heating material, food, water, and fuel to power electric generators are urgently needed. Where shops are open, cash distributions will also be helpful for people to access essential supplies, a spokeswoman said. Irish agencies including Goal and their local partners have been among the first to respond to the tragedy on the ground but the scale of the problem was said to be daunting Goal has appealed for help, particularly for funds to be donated through its website Goal.ie. The appeal is separate to efforts from the Irish Emergency Alliance, an alliance of six Irish humanitarian organisations which have called for help. Irish Emergency Alliance members Action Aid, Christian Aid, Plan International, Tearfund, Trocaire and world Vision Ireland, are responding to the crisis by fundraising to provide food, water, blankets, hygiene kits and shelter. Irish Emergency Alliance Executive Director, Brian Casey, said: “This is a time for concerted, united action. The impacts of these earthquakes has been devastating. In the midst of an already harsh winter, vulnerable children, families and others have been shaken to the core by the devastating earthquakes which have killed thousands in Northern Syria and Southern Turkey. The Department of Foreign Affairs has said it has sent a member of its UN Disaster Assessment and Coordination (UNDAC) panel of people who can deploy at short notice, to Turkey. A spokesman said the panel was in place to provide personnel to help co-ordinate the humanitarian response to large-scale disasters. Ireland has four members on the UNDAC panel. The Department’s aid arm, Irish Aid, also operates its own rapid response roster of people with experience in responding to large-scale disasters. However Irish Aid has not as yet been asked to deploy experts from its own panel. It said it remained ready and willing to do so “if and when our UN partners request assistance”. The Church of Ireland’s world aid and development programme, Bishops’ Appeal, has also launched a call for donations to support relief efforts in Turkey and Syria. Funds will be channelled through Christian Aid