Dublin post-punk band Fontaines DC won the Brit Award for best international act at a ceremony in London on Saturday night, while Harry Styles swept the board, winning all four of his categories. The 29-year-old musician claimed best song – for the ubiquitous As It Was, which spent 10 weeks at No 1 last spring – best album (Harry’s House), best pop/R&B act and the controversial best artist award. The latter category, which replaced the gendered best artist prizes in 2022, was the subject of a backlash when women and non-binary musicians were entirely excluded from this year’s nominations, which comprised Styles, Central Cee, Stormzy, George Ezra and Fred Again. In response, a spokesperson for the Brit awards acknowledged that the lack of women and non-binary acts in the category was “disappointing”, but added: “We also have to recognise that 2022 saw fewer high-profile female artists in cycle with major releases as was the case in 2021.” In the wake of the best artist controversy, organisers of the Brit awards were keen to stress the high number of overall nominations for female and non-binary acts and the prevalence of women and non-binary stars performing at the ceremony: Lizzo, Wet Leg, Sam Smith and Kim Petras, Cat Burns, Becky Hill and Ella Henderson joined Styles, Stormzy, David Guetta and Lewis Capaldi. But on the night itself, nine of the 15 awards – 60 per cent – were won by male acts, including three out of the four genre categories. The awards were also dominated by white artists: Beyoncé and new British girl group Flo were the only artists of colour to take home trophies. Styles’s clean sweep – in front of an audience that included former prime minister Liz Truss – follows similar success at last weekend’s Grammy awards, where he won album of the year and best pop vocal album. Accepting the award for best hip-hop/grime/rap act, Aitch made a dig at Styles, who at last week’s Grammy awards said “people like me” don’t win Grammies, a comment that drew widespread criticism given the cultural dominance of white male artists. “Not many people where I’m from, especially my side of Manchester, get the opportunity to stand up here and receive such an amazing gift of an award. And I think that’s the main reason I do it for, to set examples and to let people know it’s possible no matter where you’re from.” Accepting the award for best artist later in the night, Styles paid tribute to a number of female British pop superstars: “I’m really, really grateful for this and I’m very aware of my privilege up here tonight, so this award is for Rina [Sawayama], Charli [XCX], Florence, Mabel and Becky [Hill], thank you so much.” Accepting his final award, for album of the year, Styles said he was proud to be representing Britain on the international stage. The Brits also honoured Styles’s primary co-writer, Kid Harpoon, in the second year in the songwriter category (won by Ed Sheeran in 2022). Harpoon, previously a solo musician, is also known for his collaborations with Lizzo, Florence + the Machine, Jessie Ware, Mabel, Maggie Rogers and Miley Cyrus on her current UK No 1 single Flowers. Styles was the night’s most nominated artist alongside Wet Leg. The Isle of Wight duo of Rhian Teasdale and Hester Chambers won two of their four nominations: best new artist and best British group. Collecting the latter, Teasdale riffed on their Domino label-mates Arctic Monkeys, parroting Alex Turner’s 2014 acceptance speech for best album: “That rock’n’roll, hey? That rock’n’roll! It just won’t go away! It might hibernate from time to time, and sink back into the swamp ...” In keeping with their cottagecore style, their Brits performance included a morris dancing troupe. They were also fresh from triumphing at this year’s Grammys, where they won best alternative music performance (Chaise Longue) and best alternative music album (Wet Leg). Beyoncé also won two awards, beating Burna Boy, Kendrick Lamar, Lizzo and Taylor Swift to best international artist, and the likes of Jack Harlow and the cast of Disney’s Encanto to international song of the year, for Break My Soul. She did not appear at the ceremony, instead sending videoed acceptance speeches in which she thanked her fans and primed them for the start of the long-anticipated tour around her latest album, Renaissance, this summer. The Irish post-punks Fontaines DC won best international group, triumphing over K-pop girl group Blackpink, rappers Drake and 21 Savage, Swedish sister folk duo First Aid Kit and US soul outfit Gabriels. The primary categories at the Brit awards are voted for by the Brits Voting Academy, comprising around 1,200 music industry experts. Of this year’s voting cohort, 52% identified as women and 31% of members are black, Asian or minority ethnic. The genre categories, however, are voted for by fans on TikTok as part of the Brit awards’ attempt to engage a youth audience with little interest in traditional awards ceremonies. The 1975 were named best alternative/rock act and Becky Hill won best dance act for the second consecutive year. The Brits faced further controversy with the pop/R&B category, which featured no R &  artists; nor were any R &  acts recognised in any of the major categories. Musicians including producer MNEK and R &  singer Mahalia criticised the Brits for the oversight, the latter tweeting: “Forget putting us in this category. Give us our own! How many times do we have to scream at you?” In addition to Aitch’s comments about Styles, there was further upset on the night as songwriter Tom Grennan made an off-colour remark to Ellie Goulding about her armour-like dress as they presented the award for best new artist: “I love what you’re doing – they’re your real boobs?” Announced prior to the evening, British R &  trio Flo won the rising star act – collected from Jessie J on the red carpet before the ceremony – and David Guetta, who is French, was named producer of the year, a category that has historically only recognised British acts. The Brit awards were presented by Mo Gilligan and took place on a Saturday night for the first time. – Guardian