The new leader of the Social Democrats will be the Cork South West TD Holly Cairns, after potential rivals on Sunday announced they would back her in a co-ordinated move. Ms Cairns announced via Twitter that she would stand for the leadership on Sunday morning, and her announcement was followed by endorsements from Wicklow TD Jennifer Whitmore and Dublin Bay North TD Cian O’Callaghan. Dublin Central TD Gary Gannon had ruled himself out last week, meaning that Ms Cairns will be unopposed to replace co-leaders Catherine Murphy and Róisín Shortall, who said last week they were stepping down after eight years. She will be, at 33, the youngest party leader in the Dáil. Ms Cairns, a first-time TD, has been an impressive Dáil and media performer since her surprise election in 2020. She quickly became the favourite after the announcement by Ms Shortall and Ms Murphy last week. From Turk Head in west Cork, Ms Cairns was elected to Cork County Council in 2019, winning a seat by just one vote, and went on to be elected to the Dáil at her first attempt in 2020. Since then she has been especially vocal on social issues in the Dáil and has developed a strong media profile as perhaps the best known of the party’s TDs. She recently spoke out about the abuse received by many politicians, especially women politicians, and revealed that a persistent online stalker had begun to show up at her home. The Social Democrats were one of the surprise packages of the last election, winning six seats after going into the campaign with just two. But Ms Cairns will face significant challenges as the party prepares for the next general election, with at least some of their seats – including perhaps her own – looking vulnerable to a big Sinn Féin vote. Fine Gael will also seek to regain its seat in Cork South West, where it has always held at least one seat. The Social Democrats were at just 2 per cent nationally in last week’s Irish Times/Ipsos opinion poll, a decline of one point since October. Speculation about a merger or alliance with the Labour Party is never far away, though party figures routinely rebuff the suggestion.