President Michael D Higgins has visited a Co Donegal school that was struck deeply by the Creeslough tragedy. Ten people, including Mulroy College pupils James Monaghan and Leona Harper, died in an explosion at a service station in the village last year. The victims also included Catherine O’Donnell and Martina Martin, mothers of students at the school in Milford. The President praised students for their strength and courage since the tragedy on October 7th. “May I pay tribute to each and every one of you for the tenacity, the courage, the determination, the resilience, the resolve, and the strength that each of you have shown over the past few months,” he said. “Events like this change us all in different ways. For some of us here today, the tragedy has changed the paths of your lives in a very real and tangible way. “For others, the changes may be more subtle, but nonetheless profound. However, all of you are unified in your strength and togetherness, the resilience that you have shown, and the sense of community that has been so evident.” The President also spoke to students about the threat of global hunger, food security and his recent meetings in Senegal with African leaders. He was welcomed to the school by principal Fiona Temple, who said the President’s visit had reassured pupils and their families that they had not been forgotten. “It is an incredible honour for us in Mulroy College to welcome President Higgins here today. As a school community we have suffered great loss and heartache and we continue to remember each day those we have lost. “We thank you, President Higgins, for your presence here today. By visiting us you are acknowledging that we have not been forgotten, that we are not alone. You have given us great hope and strength to continue to move forward.” She said it was “an extremely uplifting” day. President Higgins also spoke with groups of students from the Student Council and the Green School Committee. The Student Council informed the President of the work they are currently doing in the school, their commitment to ensuring the school community continues to progress and their concerns for young people as a result of Covid-19 restrictions the increased trend in young people vaping in Ireland. The Green School Committee outlined the work they completed last year promoting biodiversity and their current work under the theme of global citizenship, litter and waste. Ms Temple then led President Higgins through the school where the art department showcased pieces from senior classes.